^■^ 


■  VV" 


IV^-AC 


v  '■ 


•"'   s 


^-  X  ■  :^ 


■i.V'  ^'•'^V3■;iiT. 


: A  Trne  Relation  of  what  passed  between  Dr.  John  Dee  and  some 

Spirits  •  with  Letters  of  sundry  great  men  to  the  same,  with  a  Preface 
by  Meric  Caaanbon.     Folio,  a  fine  impression  of  the  frontispiece^  con- 
•t^nng  6  portraits,  an,,  ^ates;  a  some.Ut   '^"-^^"-f^-^^^.  ^  ^^^     ^o   12     0 
The  Britwell  copy  sold  for  £22. 


calf 


/r 


-?■?:., 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Research  Library,  The  Getty  Research  Institute 


http://www.archive.org/details/truefaithfulrelaOOdeej 


5^ 


4 


► 


^ 


■>.  > 


A  True  6c  Faithful 

ELATION 

OF 

What  paffed  for  many  Yeers  Between 

D".  JOHN   DEE 

(A  Mathematician  of  Great  Fame  in  Q^  Eliz. 
and  King  James  their  Reigncs)    and 

Some  Spirits  • 

Tending    (had  it  Succeeded) 
To    a   (general    <tA Iteration   of  mo/l    STATES 
K.IH.Q'I^  0  ME^   in  the  World. 

His  Trivate  (Conferences  with  Rodolphe  Fmperor  of  Germany^  Stephen 
K,  o^Toland^  and  divers  other  Prikces  about  it. 

The  Particulars  ofhisCau(e,as  it  was  agitated  in  the  Emperors  Court; 
By  the  Pop  £  s  Intervention  :    His  Banilhmcnt,  and  Rcftoration  in  part. 

AsAlso  %r 

The  Letters  or  Sundry  Great  Men 

and  P  R I N  c  E  s  (fome  whereof  were  prefent  at  fome  of thefe 
Confcrencesand  Apparitions  of  Spirits  ;)  tothefaidD.DEE, 


and 


O  U  T       O  F 

The  Original  Copy,  written  with  D'-  Dees  own 
Hand:  Kept  in  the  LIB  RARY  of 

Sir  T  H  0.     C  0  T  T  0  JA(;  ,    K^  Baronet. 


WITH    A 


PREFACE 

Confirming  tlie  Reality  (as  to  the  Point  of  S  p  i  r  i  t  s)  of 
This  RELATION  :  and  fhewing  the  (everal  good  Uses  that 
a  Sober  Chriftian  may  make  of  All- 

B  Y 

Meric.  Casaubon,D.D. 

Printed  by   D.  I/faxwell  ^    for  T.   Garthwait,    and  fold  at  the  Little 
North  door  of  S.  fauls^  and  by  other  Stationers.   165^9. 


o 


m 


The  Orderofthe.  Insjnrutt  — 


I  |F-/^^CXI£Uy3^^^/.j^^^  thelnfitrrd^  of  Spirits    . 


.    Dee  avaucheth  his  ptoneis  hm^h:hy.^elujdlJtiniJhy. 


f|ffffffffffff:f:ff^ffffffff|fffff 


PREFACE. 


HAT    is  here  pre(ented  unto  thee   ( Chriftian  Reader)  be= 
in^  a  True  and  pAithful  Relation ^  O'c.  CascheTidebearech,   and 
will  be  further  cleared  by  this  Preface)  though  by  the  carriage 
of  it,  in  fomc  relpeds,  and  by  the  Nature  of  it  too,  it  might 
be  deemed  and  termed,  /^  Work  of  Varknejfe :    Yrf  it  is  no  o- 
ther  then  what  with   great  tendcrneife  and   circumfpedlion, 
was  tendered  to  men  of  highelT:  Dignity  in  Europe  ,  Kings  and  Princes ,  and 
by  all  (  Ewg/W  excepted)  liftned  unto  for  a  while  with  good  refped:.     By  fome 
gladly  embraced  and  entertained  for  along  time  ;  the  Fame  whereof  being  car- 
ryed  unto  ^o;«^,it  made  the  Pope  to  beftir  himlelf,  not  knowing  what  the  event 
of  it  might  be,  and  how  much  it  might  concern  him.      And  indeed,   filled  all 
men,  Learned  and  Unlearned  in  moft  places  with  great  wonder  and  aftonifh- 
mcnt :     all  which  things  will  be   (hewed   and  made  good   (to  the  utmoft  of 
what  we  have  laid)  in  the  Contents  of  this^book,  by  unqueftionable  Records 
and  evidences.    And    therefore  I  make  no  queftion  but  there  will  be  men  e- 
nough  found  in  the  world  whole  curiofity  will  lead  them  to  Read  what  I  think 
it  not  to  beparahell'din  that  I\tnd  by  any  book  that  hath  heenjet  out  in  any  Age  to  read :    I 
fay,  though  it  be  to  no  other  end  then  to  fatisfie  their  cUrio/ity.    But  whatfbever 
other  men,  according  to  their  leveral  inclinations,  may  propole  to  themfelvcs 
in  the  reading  of  it  ,  yet  I  may  and  muft  here  profcfle  in  the  nrft  place,  in  Truth 
and  Sincerity,  that  the  end  that  I  propofe  to  my  felf  (  fo  far  as  I  have  contri- 
buted to  the  Pubhftiing  of  the  Work)   is  not  tolatisfiecuriofity,but  to  do  good, 
and  promote  Religion.     When  we  were  firft  acquainted  with  the  Book,  and 
were  offered  the  reading  of  it,  having  but  lately  been  converlant  iri  aSubjedtof 
much  Affinity  ;  to  w?t,  o^  MJiaken  Injpiration  3.nd  Tojfe/sion  ^  through  ignorance 
of  Natural  caules   (which  labour  of  ours,  as  it  was  ouraime  at  the  firft  in  pub- 
lifhing  of  it,  to  do  good,  fo  we  have  had  good  reafon  fince  to  believe,  that  We 
did  not  altogether  miffeof  whai  weaimedat)we  could  not  but  gladly  accept  of  it. 
And  as  we  gladly  accepted  ,  fo  we  read  unto  the  end  with  equal  eagernefle  and 
Alacrity :    Which   when  we  had  done,   truly  it  was  our  Opiniort ,    That  the 
Publifhing  of  it  could  not  but  be  very  Seafonable  and  Ufeful,  asagainft  Jihei/ls 
at  all  times,  fo  in  thele  Times  efpecially,  when  the  Spirit  of  Error  and  Illufi- 
on,  not  in  moMAnabajftiJi  s  only,  even  of  the  worft  kind  that  former  Ages  have 
known  ancf  abhorred,  doth  fo  much  prevail,  but  in  many  alfb  ,  who  though 
they  difclaim  and  deteft  openlv   (and  heartily  too,  I  hope,  moft  of  them)   the 
fruiiis  andelfed:s  that  fuch  caules  have  produced  in  others,  yet  ground  them- 
selves nevertheleile  upon  the  lame  principles  of  Suppofed  Infpiration  and  irnma- 
ginary  %eViliitions  ,•  and  upon  that  account  deem  themfelves,  if  not  the  Only, yet 
much  better  Chriftians  then  others.     And  I  was  much  Confirmed  in  this  Judg-' 
inent  when  I  was  told  (as   indeed  1  was,  at  the  firft,  by  them  that  knew  very 
Weil)  that  the  ^o^  Reverend,  Pious  and  Learned  JirchbiJ]?op  of  ^rmagh^  lately 

.  _  „    A     '    ^  "        deceaf- 


The  T'B.eF  AQS. 


deceafed,  upon  reading  of  the  faid  book,  before  his  death,  had  declared  him- 
felf  to  the  fame  purpole,  and  wijhed  it  'fnuted.  But  becaufe  it  is  very  poffible, 
that  every  Reader  will  not  at  the  firft  be  lb  well  able  of  himfelf  to  make  that 
goodufe  by  good  and  Rational  Inferences  and  Obfervations  of  this  fad  Story 
as  is  aimed  at,  my  chiefeft  aim  in  this  Preface  is  to  help  fuch.  And  becaufe  it  is 
not  lefle  probable  that  this  Licentious  Age  will  afford  very  many,  who  with  the 
Saduces  oi  old  ( that  is,  Jewifh  Epicures}  believe  no  5/?/m,  or  Angel,  orRefur- 
redion  ,•  who  therefore  being  prepolTefled  with  prejudice  when  they  hear  of  fo' 
many  Spirits  as  are  here  mentioned,  and  fo  many  ftrange  Apparitions,  infeveral 
Kinds,  will  not  only  fling  back  themfelves,  but  will  be  ready  to  laugh  at  any 
other  that  give  any  credit  to  inch  things.  Although  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to 
convert  anybyReafon  that  are  engaged  into  fuch  an  opinion  by  a  wicked  lifej 
that  is,  Unjuit  pradifes.  Luxurious  lewd  courfes,open  profanenefife,  under  the 
name  of  Wit  and  Galantry,  and  the  like ,  becaufe,  I  think,  it  is  veryjuftwitH 
God  to  leave  fuch  to  the  error  and  blindnelTc  of  their  Judgments ,-  lb  that  with,-, 
out  a  Miracle  there  can  be  little  hopes  of  fuch.  Yet  I  fhall  hope  that  fuch  as  aj-^ 
Rational  men,  fober  in  their  Lives  and  Converfations ,  fuch  as  I  have  known 
my  felf;  yea,  'men  of  excellent  parts  in  other  things,  men  that  are  both  willing 
to  hear  and  able  to  confider  :  that  fuch,  I  fay,  may  receive  fome  latisfadion  by. 
what  I  (hall  fay  and  propofeto  their  Ingenuous  confideration  in  this  matter.  Were 
we  to  araue  the  cafe  by  Scripture,  the  bufineffe  would  foonbe  at  an  end  ;  there 
being  no  one  Controverted  point,  among  men,  that  I  know  of,  that  can  receive 
a  more  Ample,  Full,  Clear  and  fpeedy  determination,  then  this  bulinefs  of  Spi- 
rifi,  and  Wtuhes^  and  Apparitions  may,  if  the  Word  of  God  might  be  judge.  But 
I  will  iuppofe  that  1  have  to  do  with  fuch,  who  though  they  do  not  altogether 
deny  the  Word  of  God,  yet  will  not  eafily ,  however,  admit  >of  any  thing  that 
they 'think  contrary  to  Reafon  ,  or  at  leaft  not  to  be  maintained  by  Realbn.  I 
fhall  therefore  forbear  all  Scripture  Proofs  and  feftimonies  in  this  particular, 
and  delire  the  Chriftian  Reader  (  who  otherwife  might  juftly  take  offence)  to 
take  notice  upon  what  ground  it  is  that  I  forbear. 

But. though  I  will  not  ufe  any  Scripture  for  proof,  yet  by  way  of  Application 
I  hope  I  may  be  allowed  to  ufe  fome  Scripture  words,  which  may  duedus 
perchance  to  a  good  Method  in  the  examination  of  this  bullneffe.  The  Apoltle 
faith  in  a  place,  <p«.Vxo^7s/ 1*^*/ (ro^oJ,  e;u»s«e>icrct:. :  (profe/sin^them/ihes  to  he  wife ^  they  became 
fools)  I  fliall  not  enquire  of  whom,  and  upon  what  occafion  it  was  fpoken  :  I 
draw  no  argument  from  it ;  only  becaule  there  is  a  fhew  of  great  Wiiclom  in 
this  Opinion  J  and  yet,  ^s  I  conceive,  as  much  of  Error  and  falfhood  (that  is, 
Folly  J  as  the  word  is  often  ufed)  as  in  any  other  falfe  opinion  that  is  lelfe  popular. 
I  will  frame  my  difcourfetothis  iffue,  firft,  to  enquire  what  it  is  that  makes 
it  fo  popular  and  pluifiblc,  among  them  efpccially  that  pretend  to  more  then 
ordinary  Wifdom^  and  then  fecondly, lay  it  open(as  I  amable)co  the  view  in  its 
right  colours,  that  the  Folly  or  falfhood  of  it  may  be  difcernabie  even  to  ordi- 
nary judgments. 

Fiji  then,  (as  for  them  that  deny  Spirits  ^  Sec.)  we  lay.  The  world  is  full  of  im- 
pofturc;  to  know  this,  to  obferve  it  in  all  Trades,  inall  ProfelTions,  in  all  ranks 
and  degrees  of  men,  is  to  know  the  world,  and  that  is  to  be  wife.  Though  we 
call  zhem  Jailers  J  yet  they  deierveto  be  thought  the  plainelldeaUng  men  of  the 
world  that  fliew  their  tricks  openly  in  the  ftreets  for  money  ;  for  they  profefle 
what  they  are.    They  are  the  trueil;  Juglers  that  do  their  feats  (and  they  for  mo- 


The   T%EFACE. 


ny  toojttioft  of  them)  under  the  Veil  and  Reputation  of  HolincfTc^Sandity,  (or 
Saintfhip)  Religion,  Virtue,  Juftice,  Friendfhip  ;  fine  words  to  catch  men  that 
are  ofealie  Belief,  and  thinks  that  everything  that  glillers  muft  needs  be  gold. 
Hence  it  is,  that  men  that  have  had  the  Regutation  of  Wife  men  in  the  world  ■■ 
have  commended  this  unto  us  as  greateft  Wildom,  Not  Easily  To  Be- 
L I  E  V  £■:  Mw?*'  ^  iiit^vY,sa  [e.Tiriiv :  «fT?*  7<tt?T*  ^Sy  (pftfSy  Epicharmus  got  more  credit  for 
this  one  faying  (  and  hath  done  more  good  too,  perchance)  then  many  that 
have  been  the  Authors  of  vaft  Volumes.  Now  if  thofe  things  that  are  expofed 
to  fenfc,  the  proper  Objedis  of  our  Eyes  andEares,  be  lyable  to  {omuchlm- 
pofture  and  Deceit,  that  the  wifeft  can  fcarce  know  what  to  believe:  How 
much  more  caution  do  we  need  in  thofe  things  that  are  fo  much  above  Senfe 
and  in  fome  refpcds  contrary  to  Senfe  (and  that  is  «S/)/>/ff)  that  we  be  not  deceiv- 
ed ?  If  we  confidertheNaturc  of  man,  his  Bodily  frame,  the  AfFedionsofhis 
foul,  the  Faculties  of  his  mind,  we  (hall  have  no  occafion  at  all  to  wonder  if 
moft  men  are  apt  to  believe  and  to  be  cheated-  But  as  no  caufe  to  wonder,  fo  as 
little  cauie  to  imitate  :  Felix  qui  rerum  potuit  cognofcere  caufas !  ri^<t]o^oyU,  a  deftre  of- 
or  to  grange  things  that  may  caufe  amaztmentj  is  the  proper  affection  of -the  vulgar,that 
is,  of  moll  men  ,  which  they  bring  into  the  world  with  them,  (  it  is  theob- 
(ervationof  the  wileftof  menthat  have  Written  concerning  the  affairs  and  a<51:i- 
onsof  men)  and  cannot  be  rid  of  but  by  wifdom,  which  is  the  happinefle  of 
few  :  Etrandi^  non  necefsitas  tantum^  fed  amor.  Seneca  fbmewhere  fpeakingof  the 
Nature  of  Man  j  There  was  a  time  when  the  world  was  much  governed  by  0- 
racles ;  private  men  went  unto  them  as  unto  God,  Kings  and  Princes  lent  unto 
them  to  be  advifed  about  greateft  matters :  and  fo  much  faith  was  afcribcd  unto 
them,  generally  ,  that  the  very  word  became  a  Proverb  appliable  unto  thofe 
things,  whereof  no  queftion  can  be  made.  Yet  thofe  very  ancient  Heathens , 
that  tell  us  of  thefc  Oracles,  tell  us  of  their  vanity;  and  though  they  fay  nor. 
That  all  were  falfe  and  counterfeit,  yet  whileft  they  acknowledgit  of  lbme,they 
give  us  juft  occafion  to  fufpecft  that  it  might  have  been  found  iis  true  of  the  reft 
alfb,  had  like  care  been  taken  to  examine  the  truth  of  them  alfo. 

Again,  there  was  a  time  (and  that  time  not  many  hundred  years  yet  paft) 
when  Miracles  were  the  only  difcourfe  and  delight  of  men:  Ghoftsand  Spi- 
rits were  in  every  houle ;  and  fb  prone  were  men  to  receive  what  was  delive- 
red unto  them  in  that  kind,  that  Miracle-makers  were  much  put  to  it  ,  not 
to  make  their  ftories  probable,  (for  that  was  not  ftood  upon  )  but  to  make 
them  wonderful  enough;  infomuch  that  fome  have  been  forced  seetheiifeof.i<- 
to  complain  publickly  of  the  credulity  of  the  people,  who  yet  them-  *""""  '^^• 
felves  tell  us  much  more,  I  dare  fay,  then  was  ever  true.  As  of  Miracles,  fo 
of  Exorcifmes :  How  many  Divels  and  Spirits  have  been  driven  out  of  men  and 
women,  fuppofed  to  be  p^pJJ^d^  by  Iblemn  Exorcifmes,  to  the  great  wonder 
of  the  beholders,  which  afterwards  upon  further  fearch  and  examination,  have 
been  convicted  to  have  been  nothing;  but  the  artifices  and  fubtil  contrivances  of 
men  ?  Sentences  and  Judgments  have  palled  upon  fuch  cheats  when  they  have 
been  difcovered  in  moft  places  of  Europe,  which  have  been  publiOied.  But 
they  have  done  ftrange  things  though  (  fome  that  were  though:  poffefTed)  and 
things  impoftible,  to  ordinary  fenfe,  to  be  done  by  Nature,  It  is  very  true,lome 
have  :     But  they  that  know  what  ftrange  things  may  be  done  to  the  amaze- 

A  1  rricnt 


Ihe    T  "RE  FACE. 


ment  of  all  not  acquainted  with  fuch  myfteries,  by  long  lifi  and  Cupme^  they 
will  not  eafily  wonder  (fo  as  to  make  a  fupernatural  thing  of  it)  though  they 
fee  things,  which  ,  to  their  fight  and  of  moft,  cannot  but  feem  very  wonder- 
ful and  almoft  impoiTible.  As  for  the  bodily  temper  of  man  and  of  his  ^rain^ 
it  hath  been  fufficicntly  by  fome  late  books  of  that  fubjea:  (  Enthufia/me  ) 
both  by  reafons  from  Nature,  and  by  fund ry  examples  proved,  that  a  very  lit- 
tle diftemper  ol  the  brain,fcarce  difcernable  unto  any,but  thofe  that  are  well  verfcd 
in  theftudyof  Natural  caufes ,  is  enough  toreprefent  Spirits,  Angels  and  Di- 
vels,  Sights  and  Stories  of  Heaven  and  Hell  to  the  Fancy  :  by  which  fober  kind 
of  MadnelTe  anddeliration,  fo  little  underftood  vulgarly,  many  have  been,  and 
are  daily  deceived  j  and  from  thefe  things ,  through  the  ignorance  of  men  , 
ftrant^e  things  fometimeshaveenfued,  and  the  peace  of  Common- wcales  hath 
fuffered  not  a  little. 

Jnjlotk^  in  his  Meteors,  tells  of  one  thatalwayes  faw  (fo  he  thought,at  leaft) 
another  man's  fhape  before  his  eyes,  and  how  they  happened  unto  him  naturally, 
he  gives  a  reafon.     Hyppocrates^  mpi  araf9«r«<v^,    (  a  v^'-y  fliuit  Difcourlc,  but  full 
of  excellent  matter)   fheweth  how  fome,  both  men  and  women,  through  Na- 
tural caufes,  come  to  fancy  to  them felves  that  they  fee  j^^v^-f    Divels  and  Spirits, 
and  to  be  tormented  in  their  Souls,  even  to  the  making  away  of  themfelves  by 
their  own  hands.     The  Author  of  the  book,  Ve  Morbo  Sacro,   (very  ancient  too, 
bur  notricrht  HyppocrateSj  as  many  are  of  opinion)  hath  excellent  matter  too,to 
the  fame  purpoie ;  but  I  have  not  the  book  a-  this  time  by    me.      Hyppocrates  ^ 
(where  before)  fheweth  how  many  in  that  cafe  were  gulled  by  the  Priefts  of 
thofe  times,  making  them  believe  ,   That  this  happened  to  them  through  the 
anther  of  fome  god.     "  They  that  are  verftinthe  0/^«c/iiknow,Thatthereis  a 
"way,  through  the  help  of  ^lajfes  th^Lt  fhall  not  be  feen,  to  make  moving  fha- 
* 'dows  that  Ihall  appear  like  Ghofts,  to  the  great  terror  of  the  ignorant  behold- 
"  er  :    and  it  is  faid,  That  pretended  Aftrologers  and  Fortune-tellers  cheat  many 
"  by  thofe  fights.      It  is  the  opinion  of  fome  Jewifh  Rabbins ,  That  what 
Ghofls  or  Souls  are  raifcd  by  ISjtcromancy^  they  alwayes  appear  inverfocorp&re^  that 
is   their  head  dowards  and  feet  upwards.     Though  nothing  is  to  be  wondered 
at  in  Raboins,  who  (commonly)  ate  as  full  of  ridiculous  conceits  as  ever  came 
into  the  head  of  any  Bedlam:    Yet  my  opinion  is,  "  That  the  firfl  ground  of 
"  this  wild  conceit  was,  fome  appearance  by  the  Species  of  an  objed:,  gathered 
"through  a  little  ^/dj/e  into  a  dark  room.     For  fo  indeed  the  objeds  muftap- 
"  pear  mVerfo  corpore  if  it  be  done  in  a  high  room,   and  the  objeds  from  whence 
"the  Spiecies  are  gathered  be  lower  then  the  glafle  through  which  theypafTe.  And 
the  reafon  of  it  is  very  Demonftrable  to  the  fight  of  any  reafonable  man.     Cer- 
tainly ,by  this  fecret(which  yet  is  no  great  (ecret,being  commonly  leen  and  pradif- 
ed  among  them  that  are  any  thing  curious )  ftrange  things  may  be  done  by  a 
Cunning-man,  to  their  great  amazement  that   know   not  the  caule.     There 
would  be  no  end  if  1  fhould  attempt  to  gather  from  feveral  Authors  what  hath 
been  invented  by  men,  and  what  may  be  done  by  Art  to  cheat  men  in  matters 
of  thisnature.     Letany  man,  thatisyetaftrangertoit,  but  read  the  Hfe  of  ^Vx- 
ander  the  falje  frophet^  or  Prognofticator  ,  written  by  L«ad/7,  and  he  Oiall  lee  no- 
table examples  of  fuccefl'eful  Cheats  and  Impoflures,  fcarce  credible  indeed,  buc 
that  the  thing  was  yet  then  frelli  and  famous ,  and  that  all  circumibni.es  of 
^  -  Hifto-* 


The    T%EFJCE. 


Hiftory  confirm  the  truth  of  the  relation.  And  let  him  that  reads  it  jnda^r 
what  dull  and  dry  fellows  the  Mountebank- Aftrologers,  Proanoftjcators  and 
Fortune-tellers,  of  thefe  dayes  are,.. to  this  Noble,  Renowned  Alexmviou  Orily 
let  him  know  that  reads  ,  that  Lnckn  vjis  a  profeft  Atheift,  and  therefore  np 
wonder  if  he  find  Epicurus  fpokerl  of  with  great  refpedt,  whom  all  Atheiil:s,and 
Atheiftically  inclined  are  fo  much  obliged  to  honour.  -Thi^-vvcj^ted,  I  th'ink 
the  Story  is  very  worthy  to  be  known,  and  much  more  worthy  to  be  read  hyal\ 
men  (confideringthe  good  ufe  that  may  be  made  of  it)  then  many  books  that  are 
daily  tranflated  out  of  other  languages, 

Butlaftly,  If  there  were  any  fuch  thing,  really  as  Divelsand  Spirits  that  u(e  to 
appear  unto  men ;  to  whom  lliould  they  (probably)  fooner  appear,  then  to  fuch 
as  daily  call  upon  them,  and  devote  their  Souls  and  Bodies  untothern  by  dread- 
ful Oaths  and  Imprecations  ?  And  again,  then  to  fuch,  who  through  damnable 
curiofity  have  many  times  ufed  the  means  ( the  befl:  they  could  find  m  books  by 
Magical  Circles,  Chara(aers  and  Invocations)  and  yet  never,  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  faw  any  thing  ? 

I  have  faidasmuch  as  I  mean  to  lay  (though  fbmewhat  perchance  might  be 
addedj  to  fhew  theplaufibleneflfe  of  the  opinion,  in  oppofition  to  vulgar  appre-' 
henlions  and  capacities,  whereby  (as  I  conceive,  for  I  have  not  wittingly  o- 
mitted  any  thing  that  I  thought  material)  it  chiefly  imitles  it  felf  to  wildom^ 
and  more  then  ordinary  prudence  ,  which  all  men  generally  are  ambitious  of! 
Yet  I  would  not  have  it  thought  that  all  men  that  hold  this  concluiion     That 
there  be  no  Spirits,  ^c.  go  fo  rationally  to  work,  or  can  give  this  account  or 
any  other  more  rational  and  plaufible  for  what  they  hold.     God  knows  there 
be  many  in  the  world,  men  of  no  learning,  and  mean  capacities,  who  can  fpeak 
as  peremptorily  as  the  beft,  notbecaule  they  have  conlidered  of  it,  and  under- 
ftand  the  grounds  of  either  opinion,  but  becaufe  they  know,  or  have  heard  it 
is  the  opinion  of  fomc  Learned,  and  they  hope  they  fhall  be  thought  learned 
too  if  they  hold  with  them.     Befides  an  ordinary  (for  Ibme  have  been  learned) 
£^;icHre4«,who  makes  it  his  Motto  (to  himfelf  and  in  his  heart)  eV  ^i  f^»jir  hrivau, 
SMof  $i»<:    and  leeks  his  eafe  in  this   world  ( *7«f.c«fiac,  their  own  word,  which 
imports  Tranquility  both  of  mind  and  body  j   a  good  word  but  ill  applyed)  as 
his  fummum  bdyium^   or  chiefeft  happinefle :    It  is  -  great  eafe  to  him  when  any 
ftrange  things  doth  happen  by  Witches,   Wizards  and  the  like;  and  other  fome 
to  fatisfie  their  faith,  others  their  realbn  and  curiofity,  are  put  to  it  to  enquire" 
of  men  by  conference  ,  and  to  fearch  into  books  ancient  and  late,  Sacred  and 
Profane,  and  all  little  enough.     A  great  eafe,  I  fay,  for  him,  then,  and  upon 
all  fiich  occafions,  topoffelfe  his  Soul  in  fecure  ignorance,  andtofave  his  cre- 
dit (yea,  and  to  gain  ciedit  with  fome)  by  barely  faying,  Fabula  ejl^   I  do  not  be- 
lieve It.     We  fhall  hear  fome  of  them  by  and  by  acknowledg,  in  effed:,  as  much 
as  I  have  faid  :    I  impofe  nothing  upon  them.     I  will  not  take  upon  me  to 
judge  of  a  book  that  i  never  read  ;  I  cannot  fay  that  I  ever  faw  it.     Butbecaule 
I  have  heard  fome  men  magnifie  an  Englifh  book   written  of  this  fubjeit  to 
prove  that  there  be  no  Witches ,  I  will  impart  unto  the  Reader  that  hath  not 
obferved  it,  the  judgment  of  one  of  the  Learnedft  men  that  ever  England  faw 
(  I  wifli  he  had  been  more  gently  dealt  with  when  time  was)  of  that  book, 
whereby  it  may  appear  (if  his  judgment  be  right,  as  1  am  very  inclinable  to  be- 
lieve 


The    T'REFACE. 


lleve,  becaufe  of  his  great  Learning,  and  wonted  circumfpe^tion  in  his  cenfures) 
what  great  undertakers  many  men  are  upon  very  little  ground,  and  how  prone 
others  to  extol  what  doth  tavour  their  caufe,  though  to  the  prejudice oftheir 
better  judgments ,  if  they  would  judge  impartially.  Dr.  ^^iwoWj  in  thole  ela- 
borate'P>^/e^w««  <ie  libris  J'pocryphis  ^  where  he  doth  cenfurc  fome  opinions  of 
Boelinns  as  prejudicial  to  the  Chriftian  Faith,  ^eginaldus  Scotus^  Jiojiras^  (iaithhe) 
qui  contrarikm  'Bodino  injamt  infanieim  ^  ah  ^ap'ijlas  confiteri  ^  nonpojfe  Vemonas  ne  au- 
direquidem  mmen  Jehoy^e.  Acceperat  ille  a  bodino,  <sr  attnbuk  Tapijtis  ingenen  ^  tan- 
quam  omnes  Tapift^  in  eo  confpirarent.  ^ergit  ipfe ,  zsr  qmniam  animadverterat  quafdam 
fdmina^  maleftcas^  aliquando  ijiim  modi  nanationes  ementtn^  putavit  omnia  ejfe  fiila  j  ex 
imperitia  7)ialeBtc£  y  O*  aliarum  bonarum  artium  :    Ut  qui  nullo  judicio  ,  nulla  methodo  ^ 

miUa  optimamm  artam  fcienua^  eodem  modoaggreffas  fit  ham  renij  quomudoToeta  loqui- 
tur^ ritif.;.  ,  ^,,,.,..,-,,.^1: 

— » Tenet  infatiabile  quolcjam  Scribendi  cacoethes  : 

<sr  eodem  prorfiis  modo  ratiocinatur^  See.  We  have  been  the  more  willing  to  pro- 
duce this  paltage  out  of  the  writings  of  that  Learned  man,  becaufe  we  alio  in 
our  anTwers  may  have  occafion  to  fay  fomewhat  to  the  fame  purpofe  ;  not  of 
that  Author  or  his  book,  which  hejudgeth,  anything,  but  of  the  ground  upon 
which  he  builded,  which  we  fliall  find  to  be  the  fame  upon  which  others  alio, 
that  deny  Spirits  have  gone  upon.  But  we  will  go  Methodically  to  work,  anxl 
take  every  thincr  in  order,  as  we  have  propofed  in  the  oDjed:ions. 

Firji,  We  faid,   The  world  was  full  of  Impofture.      It  is  granted,  of  Im- 
poftorsandlmpoftures.     But  what  then  fhall  the  conclufionbe  ,    That  there- 
fore there  is  no  truth  in  the  world,  or  at  leaft  not  co  be  attained  unto  by  mortal 
man  ?     Truly,  many  books  of  old  have  been  written  to  that  effed:.     Sp^*".:  Um- 
/>/rfc«5  is  yet  extant,  a  very  learned  book  it  cannot  be  denied,  and  of  excellent  ufe 
for  the  underftanding  of  ancient  Authors ,    Phylofophcrs  efpecially.     I  could 
name  fome  Chriftians  alfo,  by  profelTion,  men  of  great  learning  that  have  gone 
very  far  that  way.     But  this  will  not  be  granted  by  fome  I  am  fure  that  are  or 
have  been  thought  great  oppugners  of  the  common  opinion  about  Witches  and 
Spirits  •   fome  Phylicians  I  mean,  and  Naturalifts  by  their  profelTion.     But  may 
not  weargue  as  plaufibly  againft  that  which  they  profefle,  as  they  have  doneor 
can  do  againft  Spirits  and  Apparitions  ?     We  would  be  loath  to  make  fo  long  a 
digrelTion  •  we  have  had  occafion  elfewhere  to  fay  fomewhat  to  this  purpofe: 
and  they  that  will  be  fo  curious  may  fee  what  hath  been  written  by  Cornel.  Jgrip- 
pa   (who  is  very  large  upon  this  fiibjed:)  about  it,  not  to  nstme  any  oth-rs.     It  is 
not  yet  a  full  twelvc-moneth  ,  that  a  friend  of  mine,  a  Gentleman  of  quality, 
brought  his  Lady  to  London   (fome  60  miles  and  upwards  from  his  ordinary 
dwelling)  to  have  the  advice  of  Phyficians  about  his  wife   ( a  very  Virtuous  and 
Religious  Lady)  troubled  with  a  weak  ftomack  and  ill  digcftion  ,  which  cau^ 
ed  gi  ievous  fymptoms.     I  think  he  had  the  advice  of  no  lefle  then  a  dozen  firft 
andlaft  :    I  am  fiire  he  named  unto  me  five  or  fix  of  thechiefefi:  in  Credit  and 
practice  that  the  Town  aflFordeth.    Not  one  of  them  did  agree  in  their  opinions, 
cither  concerning  the  Caufe  ,   or  the  means  to  be  ufed  for  a  Cure.     So  that  the 
Gentleman  went  away  more  unfatisfied  then  he  came.     What  he  did  I  know 
not:    I  know  what  fome  men  would  have  inferred  upon  this.     Yet  I,  for  my 
part,  for  the  benefit  that  I  have  received  by  it,  and  the  effcwts  that  I  have  fcen  of 


The  T\SFACE. 


it,  both  iiponmyielf,  and  others  in  my  life-time,  upon  ieveral  occafions 
(  whcxe  learned  JrttJJs J  not  Empiricl;^  have  been  employed)  thou^^h  all  the 
world  (hould  be  ot  another  opinion,  I  think  my  felf  bound  to  honour  as 
ithe  profeilioa,  lo  all  Learned,  Ingenious  Profeflbrs  of  it:  and  I  make  no 
<3ueftion  but  the  vvorfl  o(  J^rippas  objedions,  by  any  man  of  competent 
judgment  and  experience,  may^afily  beanfwered.  ■  I  lay  therefore  that  as 
in  other  things  ot -the  world,  fo  in  matters  of  Spirits  and  Jpparitioni^  though 
lyable  to  much  error  and  impofturc,  yet  it  doth  not  follow  but  there  may 
be  reality  of  truth  and  certainty  difcernable  unto  them  that  will,  take  the 
pains  to  learch  things  unto  the  bottom,  where  trnth  commonly  is  to  be 
Found,  and  are  naturally  endowed  with,  competent  judgments  to  dilcern 
between  Ipecious  arguments  and  lolidity  of  truth. 

But  this  proveth  nothing.  No:  but  the  removing  of  this  common  ob- 
jedion  may  difpofe  the  Reader,  I  hope,  to  confider  of  what  we  have  to 
lay  with  lelfe  prejudice.  And  that  flhall  be  our  next  task,what  we  have  to  fay 
for  Spirits^  Sec.  before  we  come  to  particular  Objedtions.  Wherein  never- 
thelefle  I  will  be  no  longer  then  I  muft  at  this  time,  becauie  I  fhallhavea 
more  proper-place  in  two  feveral  Tradates,  the  one  whereof  hath  been  a 
long  time  in  loole  notes  and  papers,  not  yet  digefted,  to  wit,  my  Second 
Partot  Bidujiajme:  the  other,  in  my  head  yet  wholly,  but  in  better  rea- 
dinefleto  be  brought  to  light,becau(e  of  later  conceptionj  towit,^  Difcourfe 
of  ireduhty  and  Incredulity  J  ui  things  jSjitnralj  Civil  atid  Divine^  orThcokgicaL  Wc 
fhali  meet  there  with  many  cafes  not  io  neceflary  here  to  be  fpoken  of,which 
will  help  very  much  to  clear  this  bufinels. 

^  But  here  I  (ay,  firft  of  all,  It  is  a  Maxim  of  Jrijlotles  the  great  Oracle 
of  Nature,  which  many  have  taken  notice  of,  and  applyed  to  their  feveral 
purpoies  :  o'  -aracr/  /•jcbo  ^8UT«  iimi  iptL/jiiv ,  That  which  is  generally  believed  ^  ii  moji  like- 
ly to  be  true.     Who  alfo  in  another  place  of  the  fame  book  doth  approve  the 

layin^  of  Hcflod     *i'^»  J^'oi^iyt  ■yriyL-aAv  i.-7ri}iK\j]a.i ,    nvltva.  Ketoi  UoKAoi  (pnfji.i^o>(/i.       NoW  it  a- 

ny  opinion  whereof  queftion  is  made  can  juftly  pretend  to  a  general  afTent 
and  conlent  of  all  people,  places,  ages  of  the  world,  I  think,  nay,  I  know  , 
and  it  will  be  proved  that  this  of  Witches,   Spirits,  and  Apparitions  may. 
I  do  not  know  icarce  any  ancient  book  extant  of  Philofopher  or  Hifloriari 
(the  Writings  of  prolelVed  Epicureans  excepted  ,    of  Arijlotle  we  fhall  give 
an  account  Ijyandby)  but  doth  afford  fbme  pregnant  relation,  teftimony 
or  paifage  to  the  confirmation   of  this  truth.     I  daie  fay,  fhould  a  man 
colled  the  relations  and  teftimonies  out  of  feveral  Authors  and  books  (that 
are  come  to  our  knowledge)   within  the  compafTc  of  two  thoufand  years, 
of  Authors  well  accounted  of,  generally,  and  whole  teflimonies  (Hiftori-, 
ans  elpecially)  we  receive  in  other  things  ^  a  man  might  make  a  book  of 
the  biggeft  fizeand  form  that  ordinary  books  (which  we  call  Fo//ofx)  are. 
It  is  true,  many  Authors  may  write  one  thing  which  may  prove  fallc,  as 
the  famous  hillory  of  the  thenix^  perchance,  or  lome  fuch,-  but  upon  ex- 
amination it  will  appear  that  thofemany  take  all  from  one  or  two. at  the 
moft,  who  firft  delivered  it.     They  add  nothingin  confirmation  of  their 
own  knowledg  or  experience.      But  hckt  it  is  quite  other  wile  •   thole  ma- 
ny Authors  that  I  fpeak  of  (^Hiftorians  elpecially  of  feveral  ages)  they  tell 


7he    T'REFACE, 


us  different  things  thathapned  in  their  own  times,  in  divers  places  of  the 
world  :  and  of  many  of  them  we  may  fay  they  were  fuch  as  knew  little  of 
former  books,  or  ftories  of  other  Nations  but  their  own.  Within  thefc 
200  years  the  world ,  we  know,  by  the  benefit  of  Navigation  hath  been 
more  open  and  known  then  before  ^  yea,  a  great  part  of  the  w^orld  difco- 
vered  that  was  not  known  before.  I  have  read  many  books ,  the  beft  I 
could  meet  with,  in  feveral  Languages,  of  divers  Voyages  into  all  parts  of 
the  world :  1  have  converfcd  with  many  Travellers,  whom  I  judged  fober 
and  dilcreet.  I  never  read  any  book  of  that  argument,  nor  yet  met  with 
man  that  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  confer  with,  but  was  able  of  his 
own  knowlcdgto  fay  fomewhat  whereby  my  belief  of  thefe  things  might 
be  confirmed. 

Now  for  the  Epicureans  (of  all  Philofophers  the  moft  inconhderable  in 
matters  of  knowledg,  as  former  ages  have  defcribed  them)  no  man  need 
to  wonder  if  they  denycd  thofe  things  which  by  the  fokmn  engagement  of 
their  SeB.  they  were  bound  and  refolved,  notwithftanding  any  fight  or  fenfe, 
experiende  or  evidence  to  the  contrary  ,  not  to  believe,  at  leaft  not  to 
acknowledg.  This  doth  clearly  appear  by  one  that  may  be  believed 
(though  I  have  met  with  it  in  more)  in  fuch  things.  Luc'tan  (himfelfa 
profeft  Ebicurean  Athcift )  who  doth  commend  Democritus ,  Epicurus  and 
Met  r  odor  us  (the  moft  famous  or  thatSed:)  for  their  a/aactciimy  yvaiAny  ^  ashc 
calls  it  their  fixed^  (rrelwkeable  ^  unconquerable  refalution^  when  they  (aw  any 
ftranc^e  thing  that  by  others  was  admired  as  miraculous ,  ifthey  could 
find  the  caufc  or  give  a  probable  guefle,  well  and  good,  if  not,  yet  not 
to  deparc  from  their  firft  refolution,  and  ftill  to  believe  and  to  maintain 
that  It  was  falfe  and  impofllible  :  It  is  a  notable  paflage,  andvvhich  excel- 
lent ufe  may  be  made  of.     I  will  therefore  fet  down  his  own  words 

for    their    fake   that  underftand   the  Language:     ::,.  ,.^,.  li  fAf,x<i'»(^* 

(fpeaking  of  fome  o^  Alexander  the  falfe  Trophet  his  devices  ) 

Lud'in.in  Alex,  Aldina    '»-       .  'i  *    \    '  t~    r         >  "  ha  t     n  >         >r,        n>  \   n  ~ 

td.p.  I79. 

^  l<t  loictvTit  yvd[/.nv  'ix'flof  I   ^i  d-TTi^nfAi )    jg  oiffif  «»  tiKMAi  1^  B  (M    ivfi!i>  ']iv 

If'oirov  i/i/Va7»)    tKitvo  your  CTpoT8THfl-/xti'« ,   b'^/  AiAnfler  dujh  «  7p«'r«f  lijf  (jimy^Avdaf.   "JJ   ^avt  irtif   -^tvlot 

If/ ,  J9  yinsrm  Aj'jyuU-     Who  doubts  that  this  is  the  refolution  of  many  alio 
in  thefe  dayes,  not  of  them  only  who  are  Epicureans ,  whole  manner  of 
living  (as  we  have  faid before)  doth  engage  them  to  this  opinion  ,  but 
of  others  alfo,vvho  think  it  not  for  their  credit  (  the  vanity  of  which  belief 
neverchelefs  might  eafily  appear ,there  being  nothing  fo  mean  and  ordinary 
in  the  world  wherein  theWifdom  of  thewifeft,  in  the  confideration  of 
the  caules ,  by  the  confeflion  of  beft  Naturalifts  ,  may  not  be  pofed )  to 
believe  any  thing  that  they  cannot  give  a  probable  reafon  of.     Not  to  be 
wondred  then  it  we  fee  many,  notwithftanding  daily  experience  to  the  con- 
trary, to  ftick  fo  clofe  to  thofe  tenets  which  they  have  wedded  themfelves 
unto  with  fo  firm  a  refolution  from  the  beginning,  never  to  leave  them  , 
be  they  right  or  wrong 

As  for  Anflotle^  I  confefTe  his  authority  is  very  great  with  me ;  not  be- 
caufe  I  am.  fuperfticioufly  addicted  to  any  of  his  opinions,  which  I  fhall  e- 
ver  be  ready  to  for/ake  when  better  (hall  belhewed  unco  mej  but  becaule 

(be- 


The  T\eF  ACE. 


(befides  the  judgmenc  of  all  accounted  wil^and  learned  in  former  ages)  I  aii\ 
convid:ed  in  my  judgment,that  (o  much  fblid  reafon  in  all  Arts  and  Sciences 
never  iflued  from  mortal  man   (known  unto  us  by  his  writinfT^s)   without 
fupernatural  illumination.     Well:  Anflotk  i\oi\\   not  acknowledg  S/)/r/>/ , 
he  mentions  them  not  in  any  place.     Let  it  be  granted  :    An<^  why  fliould 
it  be  a  wonder  to  any  man  that  knows  the  drifi  and  purpose  of  Arijlodes 
Phylofophy  ?     He  lived  when  P/^ro  lived  ;   he  had  been  his  fellow  Scho- 
ler  under  Socrates ,  and  forfome  time  his  Scholer^  but  afterwards  he  be- 
came his<emulus,  and  plealed  himfelf  very  much  to  oppofe  his  Dodrine  ' 
infomuch  as  he  is  cenlured  by  fbme  Ancients   for  his  ingratitude.     The 
truth  is,  flato's  writings  are  full  of  Prodigies,  Apparitions  of  Souls,  pains 
of  Hell  and  Purgatory ,  Revelations  of  the  gods,  and  the  like.     Wherein 
he  is  fo  bold  that  he  is  fain  to  excuie  himfelf  fbmetimes,  and   doth  not 
dciire  that  any  man  fhould  believe  him,  according  to  the  letter  of  his  rela- 
tions, but  in  groffeonly,  that  iomewhat  was  true  to  that  effedt.      Indeed 
he  hath  many  divme  palfages,  yea,  whole  Trcatifes ,  that  can  never  be  fuffi- 
cicntly  admired  in  their  kmd;  but  too  full  of  tales,  for  a  Phylofopher,  it 
cannot  be  denyed.     Jriflotle  therefore  refolved  upon  a  quite  contrary  way  : 
He  would  meddle  wirh  nothingbut  what  had  fome  apparent  ground  in 
I^ature.     Not  that  he  precifely  denyed  all  other  things,  butbecauic  he  did 
not  think  that  it  was  the  part  of  a  Phylofopher  to  meddle  with  thofe  things 
that  no  probable  realon  could  be  given  of.      This  doth  clearly  appear  by 
a  Divine  paflage  of  his,  Depart,  anim.  /.i.e.  5.  where  he  divides  Subftances 
in  iywlilovf »}  <l^6i{]ov(^  Eternal  ayid  Incorruptible  ^  that  is,  in  effecl,   Spiritual  (for 
even  Spirits  that  were  created  might  be  termed  a>f'''"1<",  that  is,  properly,  Ibat 
laye  not  their  hgmning  by  Generation  j   but  we  will  eafily  grant,    that  the  cre- 
ation of  Angels,  good  or  bad,  was  not  known  to  /in^totle  :   (wemay  un- 
dcrftand  Codi  and  Intelligences)  and  thole ,  that  yLiiiyj^n  yiviaia;  ;^  ?9^?<xV,  that  is 
are  mortals^     He  goes  on,  As  for  DiVtne  Subftances^  which  ipe  honour^  we  can  fay 
hut  little  of  ikm^   ihcugh  U^e  defire  if,  becaufe  fo  little  of  them   is  expofed  to  Jenfe 
Eand  Reaion.]      Mortal  thmgs  that  ive  are  familiarly  acquainted  and  daily  converfe 
withy  we  may  Aw  >  tf  we  take  pains.    'But  much  more  jhould  we  rejoice  in  the  know- 
ledg  (yea  though  Tpe  know  but  a<very  little  part)  of  things  Divitle  for  their  excellen- 
cy ^  then  in  the  knowkdg  of  theje  tiforldly  things  though  neyer  fo  perfeH  and  general  But 
the  comfort  that  we  have  of  them  [which  doth  makefo?ne  amends)  is  the  Certainty^  and 
that  they  come  witLn  the  compaffe  of  Sciences^     What  could  be  laid  more  Di- 
vinely by  a  man  chat  had  nothing  by  revelation  ?     Truly,  there   appeareth 
unto  mc  (if  I  may  fpeak  without  offence  and  miiconffrudtion)  more  Di- 
vinity in  thofe  words,  then  in  fome  books  that  pretend  to  nothing  ell^.  Add 
to  this  another  place  of  his  in  his  Metaphyftcksj  where  he  laith.  That  though 
things  fupernatural  be  of  themfelves  clear  and  certain,  yet  to  us  they  are 
not  lo  ,  who  fee  them  only  withOwles  eyes.     Can  vvc  fay  then  that  ^ri- 
ftotle  denyed  thofe  things  that  he  forbore  to  write  of,  becaule  they  were 
( their  natures  and  tbeir  qualities)  above  the  knowledg  of  man  ?    Neither 
is  it  abiolutely  true  mat  Ariflotle  never  wrote  of  Spirits  and  Apparitions. 
Ci«ro  in  his  firflbook  Ve  Divinatione^  hathalongftory  outof  himof  afhape 
®r  Spirit  that  appeared  in  a  dream  to  one  Eudmnf^  (his  familiar  friend  and 


7 he    T  PREFACE. 


acquaintance)  and  foretold  him  ftrange  things  that  caraeto  paile-  Qemem 
Jli'Xindnnus  hath  a  tlrange  llory  out  of  him,  of  a  Magical  Ring,  one  or  two, 
which  ExcejluSj  King  of  thePhocenfes  did  ule,  and  fore  fa  w  things  future 
by  them.  It  is  to  be  to  and  and  feen  among  the  fragm^iits  of  .^''jy^v/i/^')  works. 
And  that  he  did  not  deny  Witches,  may  appear  by  that  mention  he  makes 
of  them  in  more  then  one  place.  How  much  healcribed  to  common  re- 
port and  experience,  though  no  reafon  could  be  given,  doth  appear  by  his 
Preface  to  hisTreatife  Dc  Divinatione  pi^r  wfomia:  where  he  propofeth  the 
cafe,  how  hard  it  is  for  a  r.itional  man  to  believe  any  thing  upon  seporc 
whichhecan  fee  no  realon  for  j  nay  ^  which  ieemcth  contrary  to  realon  i 
a-^jfor  amanto  foretel  by  dream  what  fhall  happen  in  another  KingJomC 
far  ott  without  any  apparent  caufe.  But  on  the  other  tide,  laith  he,  notiels 
hardrodeny  that  which  all  men,  or  mofi:  men,  do  be.ieye,  to  wit,  that 
there  be  fuch  p red i»ft ions.  "For  to  fay  (his  own  word>)  that  (uch  dieams 
come  from  God  ,  belldes  whatelfe  might  be  objefted  (which  might  eallly 
be  underftoodby  them  that  underftand  his  Doctrine)  it  is  moll:  unreafon- 
able  to  believe  th.it  God  would  lend  them  to  men  either  vitious  in  their 
lives,  or  idiots  and  fools,  of  all  men  the  moft  vile  and  contemptible,  who 
have  been  oblerved  to  have  fuch  dieams  oftner  then  better  and  wifer  men. 
So  leaving  the  bull  nelTe  undetermined,  \\°i  do^h  proceed  to  theconfideration 
of  thole  Prophetick  dreams,  for  which  fome  probable  reafon  may  be  given. 
Yet  in  thefecond  Chapter  he  faith  di-eclly  ,  That  though  dreams  be  not 
^,   ^    .'    ^,       ^i'a^iii-T]^ ,    vet  they   may   be  perchance    ^/«//^o;/*,   for  fuch 

*TncLatinc  Inter-  J  J  ^  r  j 

preter  tra  flices  ic  he  acknowleciges  Nature  to  bc,  not  Gdav,  bur  s-eu^ovU*  on- 
i)  mo'U;&i\k.o^  ly.  I  vvill  not  enquire  further  into  the  meaning;  of  thefe 
better  cx^refled ,  wordS;  It  IS  not  to  be  djne  in  rew  words.  It  plainly  ap- 
ihoug'^  lyable  to  pears  that  nothing  troubled  him  lo  much  (  for  he  repeats 
amhouty.  the  objedion  twice  or  thrice)  as  thatGjd  fliould  be  thought 

to  favour  either  \vicked  men  or  fools.  I  wifli  no  worfe  Doctrine  had  e- 
"ver  been  Printed  or  Preached  concerning  God.  But  ftill  let  it  be  remern- 
bred  that  he  knew  of  no  Divine  Word  or  Revelation.  Yet  JuLScal/ger,  in 
his  Commentaries  upon  FJypocmtes  Ve  Infomnlis^  doth  wonder  that  Aril}otle 
fliould  Ifick  lo  much  at  this^  and  feems  himlelf  to  give  a  realon  grounded 
in  Nature.  Indeed  he  laith  lomewhat  as  to  the  cafe  of  fools  and  idiots 
but  nothing  (that  I  remember)  that  reacheth  to  wicked  men  alio.  Lee 
thefe  things  be  confidered,  and  let  the  Reader  judge  of  how  different  tem- 
per Aiijloik  was  from  that  ot"  ancient  or  later  Epicures.  "This  mention  of 
Jrijlotle  and  Tlato  puts  me  in  mind  of  Socrates  their  Mailer,  Ins  Familiar 
Spirit-^  no  Shape'but  a  Voice  only,  by  which  his  life  and  adtions  were 
much  directed.  The  thirg  is  attelied  by  fo  many,  fo  grave  Authors  where- 
of lome  lived  at  the  very  time,  others  not  long  after,  or  in  times  notverjr 
remcte,  that  I  know  not  how  ic  can  be  queifioned  by  any  man.  Neither 
indeed  is  it,  that  I  remember,  by  any  Heathens  or  Chriftians  of  ancient 
times,  and  there  have  been  books  written  of  it,  divers^in  Greek  and  Latine, 
whereot  fome  are  yet  extant.  But  whether  it  were  a  good  Spirit  orarK 
evil,  lome  men  have  doubted,  and  ic  is  free  for  any  man  to  think  what 
he  pleafeth  of  it.     For  my  part  I  ever  had  a  Reverend  opinion  oi^  Socrates , 

and 


The   T\SF ACE. 


and  do  believe  (if  there  be  no  impiety  in  it,  as  I  hope  not)  that  he  was   as 
among  Heathens  in  fome  refped,  a  fore-runner  of  Chrift,  to  difpofethem 
the  better  when  the  time  fhouldcome  to  imbrace  (and  it  did  it  efFedually) 
the  Gofpel.     Many  other  Phylofophers,  that  have  been  of  greateft  fame^ 
were  certainly  great  Magicians,  2S  Orpheus^  ^ythagorM^  Empedodes  ^  and  the 
like,  as  by  thofe  things  that  have  been  written  otthem  by  feveral  ancient 
authors  may  be  colledcd.     But  above  all  I  give  the  pre-eminence  to  Apol- 
hnius  Ihmeus  ^  a  man  of  later  times  ^  and  of  whom  we  may  Ipeak  with 
more  confidence  and  certainty.     This  was   the  man  whom  ancient  Hea- 
thens very  tenacious  of  their  former  worfhip  and  fuperftitions ,  did  pitch 
upon  to  oppofe  unto  Chrift.     His  Life  hath  been  written  by  divers     four 
of  them  were  joyned  together  and  oppofed  to   the  four  Golpels  :     and 
Hierocksj  a  famous  Phylofopher  of  thofe  times,   made  a  Collation  of  his 
Miracles  with  thofe  of  Chriils  ,  who  was  anfwered  by  Eufebms^  yet  extant. 
Sure  it  is,  they  prevailed  ^o  much,  that  he  was  for  a  long  time  worfhipped 
by  many,  andinfundry  places  as  a  very  God,-  yea,  by  fome  Roman  Em- 
perors, as  we  find  in  Hiftory.     fhtlojlratus  hath  written  his  Life  in  very 
Elegant  ftile  (as  T/^ot/wj  judged  J  in  8  books,  which  are  extant.     And 
though  they  contain  many  fabulous  things,  as  any  man  may  expedt  by  the 
undertaking,  yet  have  they  fo  much  truth  and- variety  of  ancient  learning, 
that  1  think  they  deferve  to  be  better  known  then  commonly  they  arc  * 
b"^  :^..uotbeunderftood,  I  am  fure,  as  they  fliouldbe,  by  any  tranfla- 
tion  either  Latine  or  French  that  ever  I  faw  :   Forthe'Parw  Edition,though 
it  boaft  of  great  things  (as  the  manner  is)  yet  how  little  was  performed 
may  eafily  appear  unto  any  that  will  take  the  pains  to  compare  it  with  the 
former  edition  of  Mdus ;    Which  I  (peak  not  to  find  fault    but  bccaufe  I 
wifh  that  fome  able  man  would  undertake  the  work  ;  there  is  not  any 
book,  by  the  Tranflations  yet  extant,  that  more  needeth  it.     What  ufc  Sca- 
llger  made  of  him,    may  appear  by  his  frequent  quotations  in  his  Notes 
-upon  EufebiHSj  in  the  Hiftory  of  thole  times.     As  for  Jppollonitis  his  Mira- 
cles or  wonderful  Ads    (which  is  our  bufinefle  here)  though  many  things 
have  been  added  ,  fome,  probably,  done  by  Impofiure ,  ver  I  uo  not  fee 
how  it  can  be  doubted  but  hedid  many  ftrange  things  by  the  help  of  5/7/- 
r\u^  which  things  may  be  judged  by  due  oblervation  of  circumftances  .  as 
for  example.  That  being  con  vented  before  Dowifww  the  Emperor  in  the  pre* 
fence  of  many,  heprefently  vanifhed  and  was  leenagrcat  way  off  (at  ^ute- 
oli  I  think)  about  the  fime  time.     That  at  the  very  time  when  i)omitian 
was  killed  at  "l^pwe,  helpakeof  itpublickly  and  of  the  manner  of  it  at  E- 
^hefus :    and  fo  of  many  others,  which  ieem  to  me  (asuittomoft)  almoft 
unqueftionable.     The  greatefl:  wonder  to  me  is,  that  fiich  was  his  port  and 
outward  appearance  of  Sandity  aud  Simplicity,  that  even  Chriftrans  have 
thought  reverently  of  him,  and  believed  that  he  did  his  wt)nders  by  the 
power  of  God,  orbyfecret  Philofophy  and  knowledg  of  Nature  not  re- 
vealed unto  other  men.    So  Jujlim  Martyr  ^  one  of  the  ancient  Fathers  of 
the  Church  judged  of  him,  as  is  well  known.     Moft  later  Phylofophers 
that  lived  about  Julians  time ,  and  before  that,  as  alfo  the  Emperors  them- 
felves,  many  of  them ,   were  great  Magicians  and  ]S(ecromancers ,  as  may 

B  2  eafily 


i:he    T'REFACE. 


eafily  appear,  partly  by  their  own  writings ,   and  partly  by  the  Hiitoiy  of 
thole  times. 

I  do  very  much  wonder  whether  any  man  ,  being  a  Scholer  ^   and  not 
ftrongly  prepofleiled,   that  doth  not  believe  Spirits^  6cc.  can  lay  that  he  c- 
ver  read  the  books  of  Tryalsand  Confeffions  of  Witches  and  Wizards,  fuch 
I  mean,  as  have  been  written  by  learned  and  judicious  men.      Such  as,   for 
example ,  I  account  NichnJ  ^^cni^ins^   his  DcmonQlatria  :  ex  judiciis  capitalihus 
5^00  plus  minus  hormmim^  Sec.  grounded  eipecially  upon  the  Confeilions  and 
Condemnations  of  no  leffe  then  900  men  and  women  in  Lorraine  within 
thecompalTe  of  few  years.     That  he  was  a  learned  man,  I  think  no  body 
will  deny  that  hath  read  him  ;  and  that  he  was  no  very  credulous  and  luper- 
ftitious  man   (though  aPapift)  that  alfo  is  moft  certain  :    and  ihavewon- 
dred  at  his  liberty  many  times.     I  know  not  how  it  is  now  in  thole  pla- 
ces ;   but  by  what  I  have  read  and  heard  of  the  doings  of  Witches  and  Sor- 
"  cerers  in  Oem'Va  and  Sa^oy  in  former  times   ( I  could  lay  fomewhat  of  my 
*'  ielf,how  my  life  was  prcferved  there  very  ffcrangely  ,  but  my  witnelTes  are 
*'not,and  I  willnot  brm?  their  creditin  queftion  tor  fuch  afeuiincffe.)    I 
am  of  opinion.    That  he  that  fhould  have  maintained  there  tnac  there  was 
no  fuch  thing  as  Witches,  or  Spirits,  &c.    would  have  been  thought   by 
moft  either  mad  and  brain-fick  (fo  frequent  and  vifible  were  the  etleds  to 
fober  eyes)   or  a  Witch  himfelf.      For  '-.deed  it  is  ordinary  enough,  that 
thofe  that  are  lo  really,  are  very  willing   (  which  deceiveth  many )  to  be 
thought  Impoftora ,  and  there  is  good  realon  for  it:     I  fliould  (ooner  fuf^ 
ped:  him  an  Impoftor  that  doth  profeffe  himfelf  (except  it  be  by  way  of 
confelfion  ,  as  many  have  done)  and  is  ambitious  to  be  counted  a  Witch  or 
Sorcerer.     I  remembe**  I  iaw  a  book  fome  years  ago,  intituled,  T)e  I'incon- 
Jiance  des  7nauvais  Anges  <(sr  Demons ^   printed  at 'P^i/'W  1612.  in  ^«4?fo,  and  ano- 
ther of  the  fame  Author,  and  (ize,  intituled,  L'incredidite  6^  jyiejcnauce  du  for- 
tile^e^Taris  1642.  Strange il:ories  are  told  there  ot  a  Province  of  France  ,  a- 
bout  that  time  (or  little  before)   marvelloully  infefted  with  Witches  and 
Sorcerers,  inlomuch  that  people  did  not  know  one    another      (  in  lome 
one  place)  in  theitreecs,  by  reafon  of  evil  Spirits  appearing  publickly  inthe 
fhapcofmen;  and  that  the  proceedings  ofjuftice  ( which  doth  not  hap- 
pen.ofcen*)   were  fometimes  difturbed  by  them.     I  think  the  Author  him- 
ielf  was  one  that  was  lent  to  the  place  by  the  King  with  lome  authority ,and 
to  make  report.     But  as  I  do  not  altogether  truil  my  memoiy,  having  had 
but  a  fight  of  the  books   (it  was  at  the  Bdl  in  St.  fauis  Church-yard  :  ;   So  I 
beleech  the  Reader  not  to  reft  upon  this  account  that  I  give  him  upon  my 
beft  remembrance,but  to  perufe  the  books  himfelf.      I  am  confident  he  may 
receive  good  latisfa(5tion,  being  things  that  were  not  done  in  a  corner  ,   but 
very  publickly  and  well  attefted  as  I  remember.     However  the  reader  muft 
give  me  leave  ( though  it  be  not  to  this  purpoie,  left   my  Ci- 
v^frVr'p*^^^'    lencebe  drawn  to  the  prejudice  of  the  truth)   to  tell  him,thac 
I  met  with  one  gre.u  fallhood  there  concerning  my  own  ra- 
ther (ofS/.  M.)  which  I  have  abundantly  refuted,  and  all  others  of  that 
nature,   when  I  was  yet  very  young.     But  that  (as  I  conceive)  which  in  all 
tfieieftories  would  moftpuzzle  a  rational  man,   is  the  fignes  which  are  let 

down 


The    T%EFACE, 


down  by  many  how  witches  may  be  known,as  Teats  ^  fwhnm'mg  upon  the  ipa- 
ter^  dry  cyes^  and  the  like  :   which  things  indeed  have  Tome  ground  of  truth 
being  limited  to  particular  times  and  places,  but  are  not  of 
general 'application.     Mr.  Vofiita  had  therefore  realon   to    i3o'f|/''°^°'"^*^* 
find  fault   with  Springerus  and  'Bodinus  for  making  that  a 
certain  token  of  a  Witch  that  (lie  cannot  weep.      Who  alfb  in  the  lame 
place  doth  well  except  again  ft  the  tryal  o^  yuvM^Kiaiai,  as  he  calls  it  (com- 
monly, purgatioper  aqiwn  fri^idam)  condemned  by  many.     But  he  had  done 
well  to  have  limited  his  exception,  snd  to  have  fhewed  how,'   and  w*hen 
and  how  far  inch  obfervations  may  be  ufed.    For  certainly  they  are  not  al- 
together to  be  neglected.     But  the  reafons  of  fuch  obfervations  or  marks 
that  are  given  by  lomc,  are  lo  ridiculous,   that  they  would  make  a  fbber 
man   (that  hath  not  patience  enough  to  ponder  all  things  diligently  )    to 
fufped  all  the  reft.     So  one  tels  us^  That  when  the  Cock  croweththe  fo- 
lemn  meetings  ot  Witches   (which  opinion  perchance  may  prove  ancient 
enough ;  as  we  fliall  fhew  elfewhere)  are  diflblved  :    and  he  thinks  a  rea- 
fon  may  be  becaufe  of  the  crowing  of  the  Cock  in  the  Golpel,  when  St. 
(Pf-m- denyed  Chriff.     Another  tells  us.  That  Witches  being  well  beaten 
trunQoVitts  (with  a  Vine  flick  or  club)  Maleficia  ilkta  fohere  fdVilllna  cogwitur^ 
have  no  more   force  to  do  hurt,  or,  that  the  party  bewitched  rccovereth. 
And  the  reafon   (bethinks,  and  yet  he  no  ordmary  man 
neither)  exmjjlcriovini  O*  Vme^dilcSl^.VeOy  ex  cujus  jmjlem    So  in  my  Copy,  it  may 
qmtidie Sacr amentum  SacrofanBi   Sariguhm  Vommi  conficitur^-  ^,-^_  t^-vutso- 

&c.  'But  I  fhall  have  a  more  proper  place  for  the  full 
examination  of  thcfe  things  in  one  of  the  two  Treatiies before  mentioned. 
It  cannot  be  denyed  but.  this  whole  bufinefle  of  Witches,  what  through 
ignorance  ,  what  through  malice,  is  very  lyable  to  many  mi  flakes  and  di- 
vers impoflures.  And  it  were  to  be  wifhed  that  in  all  fuch  Trials  fome 
prudent  Divfncs,  and  learned  experienced  Phyficians  might  be  joyned- 
But  hence  to  conclude  with  IFtenus  (who  neverthelelTe  doth  acknowledg 
Spirits  ,  and  the  lUufions  and  Apparitions  of  Divels,  and  their  mifchiev- 
ous'  opperations  as  much  as  any,  and  tells  as  ftrange  things  of  them)  and 
fbme  others,  that  therefore  there  are  no  Witches  and  Sorcerers,  is  as  if  a 
man  fhould  deny  the  power  of  herbs  becaule  a  thoufand  things  havebeeri 
written  of  them  of  old,  and  areyet  daily  falfely  and  fuperftitiouPy.  And 
indeed  it  lo  fell  out  once  in  ^me^^s  by  Tlmie  is  recorded  at  large,Where  when 
fpme  afcribed  iuch  power  unto  Herbs,  as  though  Sun  and  Moon  had  been 
fubjed:  unto  them,  the  dead  might  be  raifed  ,  armies  vanquifhed  ,  and 
whatnot!  which  was  not  very  well  reliflied  by  many  :  atlallcame  Jjcle- 
piades ,  who  perfwaded  men  that  were  very  well  dilpofed  to  beperfwaded, 
that  all  Phyfical  ufe  of  Herbs  and  Simples  was  a  meer  cheat,  and  that  men 
were  better  want  them,  there  being  other  means  eafier  and  leffe  trouble- 
fometo  rcftore  health  and  overcome difeafes  ,  which  heprofeffed  to  teach  : 
and  prevailed  lofar  for  a  while,  that  they  were  laid  afide,  and  a  new  courle 
of  Phyfick  introduced.  Which  for  awhile,  as  I  faid,  (fo  prone  are  men 
commonly  to  entertain  new  divices)  gave  good  content  generally.  It  is 
wellobferved  by  Jrijiotk  (and  I  think  a  great  part  of  humane  wifdome 

•  de- 


The  T%SF  AQ^' 


dependethon  ic^  that  in  all  things  of  the  world  that  are  commendable^ 
as  there  is  fomewhat  which  is  true  and  real,  fo  fomewhat  alfo  which  is 
counterfeit  and  falfc.  There  is  beauty  Natural,  faith  he,  and  there  is  Ar- 
tificial beauty  by  painting  and  trimming.  A  true,  found,healthy  complex- 
ion, and  that  which  makes  a  good  fhew,  but  is  not  found.  True,  real 
gold  and  filver,  but  divers  thmgsalfo  that  maybe  taken  for  gold  andfil- 
ver  at  a  diftance,  or  by  them  that  judge  at  the  outward  appearance.  So, 
true  ,  found  Ratiocination  ,  and  that  which  feems  fo  to  the  unlearned, 
or  to  corrupt  judgments,  though  it  be  very  fahe.  They  that  confiderwcll 
of  this,  may  the  fooner  come  to  the  knowledg  of  truth  in  all  things. 

Well:    we  goon. 

There  wasm/^/x  { Af  tit  Sext't^  ^T\c\tnx\y  ^  no\v  Jquenfis  (jVitai)  in 'Pro- 
rvence  (a.  County  of  F/jnce  Co  called)  in  the  year  of  the  Lord  i  6 1  i .  a  Ro- 
mifhPrieft  tryed,  convicled,  and  by  Sentence  of  the  Court  or  Parliament 
condemned  to  be  burned  alive  for  abominable  pradtifes, and  horrid  things 
by  him  upon  divers  (fome  perfons  of  quality)  committed  with  and  by 
the  Divel.  He  had  long  deiircd  it  and  fought  it  j  at  laftthe  divel  appeared 
to  him  in  the  habit  of  a  Gentleman.  The  Ifoiy  is  in  divers  books,  Frifich 
and  Latine,  and  tranflated  (at  that  time  I  believe)  in  divers  languages.  I 
would  goe  forty  miles  with  all  my  heart  to  meet  with  that  man  that  could 
tell  me  ^ny  thing  whereby  I  might  but  probably  be  induced  to  believe,  or 
at  leafl:  to  fufpctt,  that  there  might  be  fomemiflakein  the  particulars  of 
his  Sentence.  For  my  reafon,  I  muft  tonfefle,  was  never  more  pofcd  in 
any  thing  that  ever  I  read  of  that  nature.  GaJJtudus  indeed  in  Tereskius  his 
life,  hath  fomewhat  (as  I  remember)  of  Tireikius  his  Opinion ,  as  if  he 
thought  (omc  of  thofe  things  hcconfelTed  might  be  aicribedunto  imagi- 
nation ,•  but  I  fee  no  realbn  given  :  neither  are  the  things  of  that  nature , 
that  can  admit  any  fuch  fufpicion.  Befides,  Trijlan^  of  the  LtVes  of  the  Em- 
perors and  their  Coynes,  will  tell  you  (bmewhat  which  may  nfakeadoubt  '. 
whether  Gajfendus  ou^ht  to  be  believed  in  all  things  that  he  reporteth  con- 
cerning that  famous  man.  I  am  not  very  much  fatisficd  of  what  Religi- 
on (though  truly  a  very  learned  man)  Gaffendus  was.  And  by  the  way 
(  which  is  fomewhat  to  the  cafe  of  Witches  in  general)  if  I  be  not  miftak- 
cn  (fori  have  it  not  at  this  time)  there  is  a  relation  in  that  very  book  of 
fomewhat  that  hapned  to  Tereskiushy  Witches  when  he  was  a  child.  That 
wicked  Sorcerer  which  was  burned  at  Aix,  foretold  before  his  death  that 
fome  misfortune  would  be  done  at  the  time  and  place  of  his  execution  , 
which  hapned  accordingly,  and  very  ftrangely  too.  Somewhat  again,  I 
muft  confeffc ,  I  have  feen  printed  (Mimica  Viabolt,  Sec.)  to  take  away  the 
fcandal  of  fome  part  of  his  confeflion,  or  the  Devils  faying  ol  Maife,  &:c, 
fome  part  of  which  things  might  perchance  with  fome  colour  be  afcribcd 
to  imagination :  but  that  is  not  it  that  troubles  me.  But  enough  of 
him 

What  man  is  he,  that  pretends  to  learning  ,  that  hath  not  heard,  and 
doth  not  honour  the  memory  of  Joachimus  Camerartus ,  that  great  light  of 
Germany 'i  fo  wife  (andfor  his  wifdom,  and  other  excellent  parts,  loughc 
unto  by  many  Princes)  fb  moderate  a  man  (an  excellent  temper  for  the 

attain- 


The    T'BJBF  ACE. 


attaining  of  Truth)   and   fo  ver(ed  in  all  kind  of  learning,  tl^it  we  fhall 
fcarce  among  all  the  learned  of  thefe  later  Times  find  another  (o  generally 
accomplifhed.     The  ftrangcft  relations  that  ever  J  read,  or  at   leaft  as 
ftrancre  as  any  I  have  read   of  Witches,  and  Sorcerers,  and  Spirits,  1  have 
read  in  him  :    fuch  as  either  upon  his  own  knowledge  he  doth  relate,  or 
fuch  as  he  believed  true  upon  the  teftimonie  of  others  known  unto  him. 
The  I21I:  work  that  he  ever  went  about  for  the  publick  was,   'De  genenbus 
'DiVinationum^  but  he  did  not  live  ^themorc  the  pity)  to  make  an  end  of  it. 
But  fo  much  as  he  had  done  was  let  out  by  one  of  his  learned  ions,  L'tpfiiC^ 
an.Vom.  1576.  There /?  ^^- he  hith  thele   words,  De  Spifituum-verd^   qiu 
junt  Grdicis  ^cuuovta..  admtrabili  non  f'Aum  effiiacitaie^  ft dmaniffjla  Specie^  qU(t '^JLcij.aIa 
perhtbentur,pr^Jefitia  -^  hicredibda  extati'  pifiim  veterum  furratioues^  <(jrnoJins  tan- 
ponbiis  fuperatuia  jidcm  compertafunt^   extra  etiam  yonl^^.U ,   de  quihiis  pojita  dtcetur.   So 
t,%^.6cp.  15 1,  again  and  more  fully.-     But  his  ftrangefl  relations  are  in 
hxsfroctmium  to  flntarchs  i\mo  Trcatilesj  De  Vefe^u  Oraculorum^  and  De  fi- 
gura  E  I  (^onjarata  Delphis  ^  fetoutby  him  with  Notes.      Here  I  could  come 
in  with  a  whole  cloud  of  witnelTes,   name  hundreds  of  men  of  all  Nations 
and  profedions  chat  have  lived  within  this  lall:  hundred  years,  and  not  any 
among  them  but  fuch  as  have  had,  and  have  yet  generally  the  reputation 
ofrioneil,  Sober,  Learned  and  Judicious,  who' all  have  beenjrf  this  opini- 
on that  we  maintain.      But  becaufe  Wc  have  to  do  with  tWm  efpecially 
who  by  their  ProJ-elTion  pretend  eo  the  Knowleclge  of  Nature  above  other 
men,  1  will  confine  my  felf  for  further  teftimony  to  them  that  have  been 
of  thatProfelTion,     I  have  been  iom^what  curious  for  one  of  my  Calling, 
that  had  no  other  end  but  to  attain  to  iomeKnowledae  of  Nature  ,  with- 
out  which   a  man  may  quickly  be  lead  into  manifold  delufions  and  Im- 
poffurcs.     I  have  read  fome,  looked  into   many  •    I  do  not  remember  I 
have  met  with  any  profefled  Phyficianor  Naturalifl  (fome  one  or  two  ex- 
cepted,  which  have  been  or  fhall  be  named)  who  made  any  queftion  of  thele 
things.     Sure  I  am,  I  have  met  with  divers  ftrange  reUtions  in  fundry  of 
them,  of  things  that  themlelves  were  prefent  at  ,  and  faw  with  their  own 
eyes,  wheiethey  could  have  no  end,  that  any  man  can  probably  lufped:, 
but  to  acknowledge  the  truth,  though  With  lome  difparagement  to  them- 
lelves (accoiding  to  the  judgment  of  many)   in  the  free  confeftion  of  their 
own  ignorance  and  dilability  to  give  reaions,  and  to  penetrate  into  cauleSo 
Well:    whatthenfhall  we  lay  to  fiich  as  ^/(/.C^/^r,  Scaligtr^    Fermhiis^  Sen- 
nertusy  the  wonders  and  Oracles  of  their  times  ?    As  Phyficiansfo  Phylo- 
fophers,  men  of  that  profound  wifdom  and  experience   (much  improved 
in  fome  of  them  by  long  life)  as  their  writings- fhew  them  to  have  been  to 
this  day.     What  (hall  we  make  of  them  ?    or  what  do  they  make  of  them- 
felves,    that  will  cenfure  fuch  men  as  either  cheaters  or  ignorant  idiots  ? 
Hoiericus  Saxonia  ^  a  Learned  Profeffor  and   Prad:iferof  Phylick  in  Tadua  , 
in  that  Book  he  hath  written  of  that  horrible  Polonian  Dileafe,  which  he 
calls  Tlicam^  which  turneth  mens  hairs   (in  fight)  to  Snakes  and  Serpents  j 
in  that  book  he  doth  afcribe  fo  much  to  the  po^wer  of  Witches  and  Sorce- 
rers in  caufing  Difeales,  not  private  only  but  even  publick,  asPeftilences 
and  theUke,  ashiralclf  confeireth  he  could  never  have  believed^  uniil  he 


The  T  %e  FAQS, 


Was  conviacdby  manifeft experience;  and  indeed  is  wonderful,  and  may 
well  bethought  incredible  unto  moft,  yet  is  maintained  and  afTertcd  by 
Sennenus  De  Febnbiis ;  and  in  his  fixth  book  (as  I  remember  )  l>e  Murbis  a 
fafc'mo^  incantationt^  ^  \'emficiis  wduBii.  I  will  forbear  the  names  of  many 
men  of  fame  and  credit,  Phylicians  too,  becaufe  moft  of  them  are  named 
("and  commonly  enough  known}  by  Sewmtm  upon  this  occafion.  There 
is  one,  whom  I  think  interiour  to  none,  though  perchance  not  Co  com- 
monly known  or  read,  and  that  is  fieor^ius  1{aqujaiu4  a  Venetian,  who  by  his 
fir  ft  education  and  profeffion  wasan  Aftrologer,  caft  many  Nativities,  and 
tookupon'him  to  Prognofticate;  but  afterwards  confcious  tohimfelfof 
the  vanity  of  the  Art  (that  is,  when  the  Divcldoth  not  intermeddle,  as  al- 
wayes  muft  be  underftood  :  for  fome  Aftrologers  have  been  Magicians 
withall,  and  have  doneftrange  things)  gave  it  over,  and  hath  writcen  a- 
gainli:  it  very  Learnedly  and  Solidly.  Read  him,if  you  pleafe^in  his  Chap- 
ters Vc  Mi^is^  Ve  Oracidus;  yea,  through  his  whole  Book  DeDtvinatme  ^2Lnd 
you  maybclatisfied  what  he  thought  of  thcfe  things  :  he  alfo  was  a  Phy- 
fician.  But  I  muft  not  omit  the  Learned  Author  that  fet  out  Mnfrim  Vtro- 
nenfe^  a  great  Naturalift  and  a  Phyfician  tooj  he  handles  it  attheendof 
that  woik  lomewhac  roundly  and  to  the  quick  ,  i  muft  confeiTe,  but  very 
Rational.yaj^  Solidly,  in  my  judgtnent,  ^gainft  thofe  pretended  Peripa- 
teticians,  tfflfc  would  be  thought  to  defend  the  opinion  ofjnjhtle  herein. 
I  could  fay  fomewhat  of  ancienter  Phyficianstoo,  and  give  fome  account 
of  thole  many  Spels  and  Charmes  that  are  in  Iralliems^  m  all  his  books  - 
an  ancient  Phyfician  ,  in  high  efteeme  with  lome  eminent  Phyficians  of 
theie  lace  times,  as  they  themfelves  have  told  me^  though  not  for  his 
Charms,bLir<^oi  his  other  learning  and  excellent  experience  ,  which  they  had 
found  good  ufe  of  But  this  I  referve  for  another  place  &  work.  And  this  men- 
tion of  that  eminent  Phyfician  who  commended  'Irjilhenm  unto  me ^  putsmc 
in  mind  of  what  he  imparted  himfelf,  not  long  before  his  death,  of  his  . 
own  knowledge  and  experience ;  and  particularly  of  the  account  he  gave 
me  of  theexam.inationofa  Conjurer  in  Salisbury ^zt  which,he  faid^none  were 
prefent  but  King  7dm«,(of  moftBlefled  MemoryjtheDukeoflB«c^/>igkw,and 
himfelf:  It  is  likely  iome  others  may  have  heard  the  fame,and  I  had  rather 
any  body  fhould  tell  k  then  I,  who  was  then  a  patient  under  him,  and 
dutft  not,  were  I  put  to  it,  truft  to  my  memory  for  every  circum- 
flance 

Hitherto  I  have  gone  by  Authorities  rather  then  Arguments ,  partly 
becaufe  I  thought  that  the  Ihorteft  and  the  cleareft  way  for  every  bodies 
capacity,  and  partly,  becaufe  fuch  Arguments  ( if  any  bcfides  theie  wc 
have  here)  as  have  been  ufed  againft  this  opinion,  may  be  found  fully  an- 
fwered  in  thofe  I  have  cited.  The  truth  is,  it  is  a  Subjed  of  that  nature 
as  doth  not  admit  of  many  Arguments  ,  fuch  cfpecially  as  mav  pretend  to 
fubtilty  of  Reafon,  Sight,  Senfe,and  Experience  (upon  which  moft  Hamanc 
Knowledge  is  grounded)  generally  approved  aud  certain,  is  our  beft  Ar- 
gument. But  before  I  give  over, I  willule  one  Argument  which  perchance 
may  prove  of  fome  force  and  validity,  and  that  is,  Aconfideration  of  the 
it::.2^^  ^  f.;  and  evaiions  and  notorious  abfurdities  that  chefc  m^nare  pun 

to. 


The  T'B^eF  A£8. 


tOjWho  not  being  able  to  deny  the  a?/  ,or  matter  o/Ki^,wouldfcem  to  fay  fomc- 
what  rather  then  to  acknowledg  Spirits,  and  Divels^and  Witchcraft;  <Pompo- 
natius jWho  hath  not  heard  of  ?  I  once  had  the  book,I  know  not  now  what  is 
become  of  it.But  I  remember  well,I  never  was  more  w^eary  of  reading  then 
when  I  read  him ;  nothing  that  ever  I  read  or  heard  of  j^egends  and  old 
womans  tales  did  feem  to  me  more  groundlefle  and  incredible.  But  be- 
caufe  thofc  men  bear  themfelves  very  much  upon  the  power  of  imagina- 
tion (which  indeed  is  very  great,  and  doth  produce  ftrange  effeds)  I  fhall 
commend  to  the  fober  Reader  that  hath  not  yet  met  with  him  ,  Tho.  Fienus 
his  Learned  Tradat ,  Ve  yiribus  Imaginat'mm ,  a  very  Rational  and  Philofo- 
phical  difcourfe.  Of  their  miferable  fhifts  and  evafions  in  general,  the 
Author  or  Obicrvator  rather  of  Muf^.umVeronenfe  ^  before  quoted,  will  give 
you  a  good  account.  I  have  at  this  prelent  in  my  hands  the  writings  of 
a  Phyfician,  Augerius  ferrerius  by  name.  What  he  was  for  a  Phyfician  I  know 
not,-  all  ( I  doubt)  of  that  profeffion  will  not  allow  very  well  of  his  Pre- 
face to  his  Cafttgdttoncs  ^raEiictt  Medicbi^^  whatever  they  think  of  the  Cajli- 
gattones  themfelves.  But  in  general,  his  Stile,  and  various  reading,  and 
knowledge  of  good  Authors,  fpeak  him  a  Learned  man  ruflficiently,  T/;»- 
anus  in  his  Hiftory  gives  him  a  moft  ample  Elogtwn^  and  makes  him  to  have 
been  Jul.  C.  Scaltger  his  intimate  acquaintance  and  much  refpeded  by  him. 
But  1  doubt  whether  Thuams  had  ever  feen  this  book  of  his  :  it  doth  not 
appear  by  that  Elogiim  that  he  had.  Well ,  this  Learned  man  in  his  Chap- 
ter T)e  Homerica  (fo  he  calls  it)  Medicatione^  where  he  treats  of  cures  done  by 
Charms  and  Spels ,  by  Words  and  Charaders,  which  others  impute  com- 
monly to  Witchcraft :  firft,  for  the  o^,,  he  doth  not  deny  it :  (Natn  m  qud 
fsnfbus  expojita  jmit  c<^tra'Ytmre^  Jani  btminis  non  eft.)  He  thinks  them  little 
better  then  mad  men  that  will  deny  that  which  is  approved  by  ^o  vifiblc 
experience.  Yet  it  feems  he  was  one  of  them  that  did  not  believe ,  or 
would  not  believe  ( though  he  doth  not  fay  fo  pofitively)  Sinnts  and  Witch- 
ts ,  and  Supernatural  Operations.  What  then  ?  he  plainly  maintaineth 
and  argueth  it  (though  he  quote  no  Gofpel  for  it)  that  luch  is  the  nature 
of  the  Soul  of  man  (if  he  know  how  toule  it)  that  by  aftrong  faith  and 
confidence  it  may  work  any  miracle  without  a  miracle:  Verum  confidentU 
ilia^  acfirmaperjuajio  ( that  you  may  have  fome  of  his  words  if  you  have 
not  the  book  )  comparatur  mdoHls  animis  per  opinionem  quam  de  Qara^eribus  is* 
Jacrii  Verbis  conceperunt^  I)o£tis  cr  rerum  intelliQenttam  habentibns ,  ?uhil  opus  eji 
extermjed  cogmta  Vi  ammi^p^r  earn  miracula  edere  poJJuntO'C.  And  again  alittlc 
after  ,  VoHus  vero  <(sr  fibi  conflans  folo  verbo  Janabit.  I  do  not  hence  conclude 
that  this  Ferrer ius  ^  though  he  Ipeak  as  though  he  were,  and  names  no  body 
clfe  ,  that  he  wasthefirll  or  only  that  hath  been  of  this  opinion.  jh>icenne 
the  Arab  was  the  firff,as  I  take  it,  that  fet  it  on  foot :  fome  others  have  fol- 
lowed him  in  it.  Butlince  theie  men  acknowledg  the  ftrange  etFcCts  that 
Others  deny,  let  the  fober  Reader  judge  whether  of  the  two  more  likely  td 
grant  5pjr iff  and  Divels  ,  or  to  make  the  Soul  t)f  man  (of  every  man^  na- 
turally) either  a  God  or  a  Divel.  But  let  men  take  heed  how  they  attempt  ta 
do  Miracles  by  their  flrong  faith  and  confidence  ,  for  that  is  the  ready  way 
to  bring  the  Divel  unto  them,  and  that  is  it  which  hath  made  many  Witch- 

C  c^ 


"The    T  "RE  FACE. 


cs  and  Sorcerers.  As  for  that  Faith  whereby  men  did  work  Miracles  in 
the  Primitive  times,  fpoken  of  in  the  Golpel,  commonly  CiiUed ,  The. 
Faith  of  Miracles ,  that  is  quite  another  thing  ,  which  I  fliall  not  need  to 
{peak  of  in  this  place.  Of  a  flrong  confidence  in  God,  even  in  them  that 
arc  not  other  wile  very  godly,  whether  it  may  not,  according  to  Gods  firft 
order  and  appointment,  produce  fbmetimes  iome  ftrange  eftecls ;  we  have 
had  a  confidcration  ellcwhere ,  where  we  treat  of  Trccatorie  Emhufeajm.  But 
this  alio  is  quite  another  thing,  as  may  appear  by  what  we  have  written 
of  it. 

But  to  conclude  this  part  5  upon  due  confidcration  of  the  premifes,  and 
what  elfe  I  have  inreadmefle  upon  the  fame  Subjc(it  Cir  God  give  me  life 
and  health)  I  cannot  fatisfie  my  felf  how  any  Learned  man  ,  fober  and 
rational,  can  entertain  fiich  an  opinion  (fimply  and  lerioully)  That  there 
be  no  Vivds  nor  Spirits^  &c.  But  upon  this  account  which  I  give  my  felf 
(leaving  all  men  to  their  own  judgments  herein)  that  if  there  beanyiuch 
truly  and  really,  it  mull:  needs  be  becauie  being  at  firft  prepolTeffed  upon 
fomeplaufible  ground^  and  being  afterwards  taken  up  with  other  thoughts 
and  employments,  they  are  more*  willing  to  ftick  to  their  former  opi- 
nion without  further  trouble,    then  to  take  the  pains  tofeek  further. 

dides  doth  very  well  obferve.  And  when  we  lay,  A  Learned  nwi^  there 
is  much  ambiguity  in  that  word.  For  a  man  may  be  (not  to  Ipeak  of 
the  ignorance  of  the  common  people,  in  thole  climates  efpecially,  who 
think  all  Learning  concluded  in  ^Preaching  •  and  now  in  thele  times 
too  ,  them  beft  Preachers  that  in  very  deed  have  leaft  Learning ,  but 
preach  by  /7i/?/;i^  and  Injpkation  ^  as  they  call  it)  but  a  man,  I  Tay,  may 
DCzLear?ud  Ma}ij  a  very  Learned  man  in  lomeone  kind  or  profelfidn,  even 
to  Excellency  and  Admiration  ,  who  neverthelefie  is  and  may  be  found 
ignorant  enough  in  other  kinds  :  but  a  general  Learned  man  is  a  thing  of 
a  vaft  extent,  and  not  often  leen.  It  is  a  bufmeffe  of  an  infinite  labour, 
befides  that  it  requireth  Natural  parts  anfwerablc;  without  which  (judg- 
ment fpecially )  the  more  pains  fometimes  the  more  ignorance.  I  aim 
not  by  this  at  any  particular  man  or  men  (Deum  tejlor)  I  would  much  rather 
fubmitto  thecenfure  of  others  my  felf,  then  take  upon  me  to  ccnlureany  ; 
but  the  obfervation  is  of  very  good  ule,  I  know  it,  and  may  give  much  la- 
tisfadion  in  many  ca(cs,and  have  given  an  inftance  of  it  in  Tertullia?ija.nd  fomc 
others  ellcwhere. 

I  have  done  for  this  time;  I  come  now  to  the  Objections,  wherein  I  fliall 
not  need  to  be  very  long,  becaufethey  run  much  upon  one  thmg,Impofturc, 
which  hath  already  been  fpoken  of  andanfwered.  But  yet  fomewhat  more 
particularly  fhal  be  anfwered. 

Firft,  O^  Miracles.  It  cannot  be  dcnyed  but  the  world  is  full  of  horrible 
Impoftures  in  that  particular  :  Yet  I  believe  ,  that  fom.e  fijpernatural 
things ,  as  cures  ,  &c.  do  happen  in  every  age ,  for  which  no  rea- 
fon  can  be  given  ,  which  alio  for  the  ftrangenefl'e  may  be  called  Mi- 
racles. But  if  we  limit  (with  moft)  the  word  to  thofe  things  that 
proceed     immediately  from    God   or   divine  power  ;     I  fhall  not  be 

very 


The    T^EFACS. 


very  ready  to  yield  chat  many  fuch  Miracles"  are  '  fecn  in  thefe  Dayec>.  ]^c 
I  will  not  further  argue  the  Cal.e  in  this  place.  Well,  let  us  z^ko.  Miradei 
in  the  ordinary  Senfe  :  I  v^'-'^y  b^I^^'e  that  many  fuch  things  do  happen 
in  many  places  J  but  that  through  negligence  partly,  and  partly  throuoK 
incredulity  ,  they  are  not  regarded  ohentimes,  or. loon  forgotten.  And 
wifermen,  fometimes,  though  they  know  or  believe  fuch  thin-^^s  v^c  ^ixc 
not  they  very  torward  to  tell  them,  left  they  bring  themlelves  into  con- 
tempt with  ihorcfuppoled  wile  men,  who  will  Iboner  laugh  at  any  thing 
they  do  not  underftand  ,  then  cake  the  pains  to  redifie' their  ianorance  or 
inform  their  judgments.  1  hope  I  fhall  do  no  wrong  to  the  Memory  of 
that  Venerable ,  Incomparable  Prelate ,  B  i  s  h  o  p  A  n  d  r  e  w  e  s  for 
Sound  Learning  and  True  Piety  whileft  he  lived,  one  of  the  greatcft  Lights 
of  this  Land;  if  I  fet  down  two  Stories,  which  we  may  call  Mitades 
both  which  he  -""^  belir"!  to  be  true,  but  for  one  of  them,  it  feemes  he 
did  undertake  upon  his  own  knowledge  :  The  one,  concerning  a  njjki  , 
or  at  leaft  by  many  lufpeded  Witch  or  Sorcerefs,  which  theDivel,in  a  ft^ge 
iliape, did  wait  i<po?i  (or  for  rather)  at  her  death.  The  other,  concerniu'^a 
man  ,  who  after  his  death  was  reftored  to  life  to  make  Confeilionof  a 
horrible  Murder  committed  upon  his  own  Wife,  for  which  he  had  never 
been  fufpc^ted  -,  bcth  thefe,  as  he  related  them  to  my  F.  (in  familiar  con- 
vcrlation)  and  my  F.  did  enter  them  for  a  remebrance  into  fomc  of  his 
Mverfam.  In  the  fubftance  I  believe  there  could  be  no  miftake,  but  if  there 
be  any  miftake  in  any  Circumfl:ances,as  ofNames,or  othcrwife ,  that  muft  be 
imputed  to  my  F  who  was  aftranger,  not  to  the  tongue  only  ,  but  to  all 
bulinelTes  (more  then  what  might  be  known  by  printed  books^  and  fuch 
publick  Wayes)  oiEngUnd^ 
ThcFiiitjthus: 

L.  Vetula  tondinenfiSj  cu'i morienti  DiaholM  ajfuiL 
Mir  a  Bifiork  quam  narrabatut  fibi  com'pertifiimam  D.om.Epi/topus.  Fait  (ju^amL^ 
muUer  dm/sma^  et  curtofis  artlhus  addiBi/sima  :  Vicma  <&dibit4  Fuiconis,  qui 
futt  pater  Domini  VvXcoms  ^  tou  Angha  celeberrimi-;  atque  adeo  teB:/:m£  ma. 
troupe ,  matri  ejujdem  Fulconis ,  famdiah/sima,  Hdc  pa  omnem  VUam  forti- 
kgiis  dtdita  ^  is*  eo  nomine  infainium  muliercularum  arnica  et  fatrona  :  (^uimo- 
rmiti  cum  adjiarent  qua  Viri ,  qua  fdemim-e  ^raVi/iimi ;  animadyerfum  ejl  fub 
Uram  mortis  J  adjlitijfe  ad  pedes  leFii  hommem  Wuu  terribdtm  ^  (vulpinis  pelhbils 
amlUum ,  quern  ipfa  contentis  oculis  intuchatur ;  ille^  ipfam.  (hh^fttum  ejt  a  jamto- 
re ,  quare  ilium  admififfet  ilk  negardi  fe  vet  vidtjfe.  Tandem  fecedunt  ad  fene- 
flram  duo  yel  ties ,  conjilium  capturi  quid  ilk  fuerent.  Erat  quidam  Senator  in. 
gentis  nominii  ,  ....  qui  bis  Trdtor  Londinenfis  fmt  :  item  Tater  Fulconis, 
et  alti.  'IPlacet  illis  ipfum  compellare  et  rogare  quis  ejfet.  Hoc  animo  rcpetwtt  pri- 
ora  loca  jua  ad  leButn.  hiterim  L.  vocem  magnam  edit  ^  qwfi  animam  agtret  ^ 
omnes  ilUm  curare ,  f^eHare^  /ubleVare-^  mox  redit  ad  fe  tlU  ignotum  ilium  nqutruftC 
oculis,  Nnjquam  a^paret.  Ante  horn  fpatium  moritur  Agra, 

The  other  thus, 
K^lend.     Juguji,       Narrabat     hodie    nuln    rem      mirayn    ,      %e'Verendiff, 
^tdjul  ^      Domin,  Epifcop.  Eltenfis  :     quam    lUe   acceptam    amribus    fuis    a    te- 
fie  oculato^  auHore  ^    credebat  ejje  <verijsimam.      Ejl  'Vicus  m  Urbe    Londmo^ 

C  2  qui 


7he    T%EFACE. 


qui  dicittirj  Vicus  Lon^obardorum.     In  eo  <vko  Tardcia  eji^  O*  <edes  parieciilis  ^  in 
qua  fuit   ^re:^byter  ^    homo  fummd  fidei  ,  et  notct  ^ietatis  ^  ......  An.  i  ^6].  quo 

anno  J  Ji  unquam  alias  ^  pejlis  grajjuta  eft  per  banc  lirbein  Londinum.  TiarraVit  igt- 
tur  hie  Ta.rochits  et  pifswi  aliis  ^  et  tp ft  quo  que  Dom.  Epifcopo  fibihoc  aaidtjje» 
Erat  tin  amicus  in  Jua  T'ar^cia  wfi^nis -^  v/r,  utomnes  exijlimabant  ^  probus  et^im. 
Htcpejle  concptus  advocayu  Tresbyterum  ilium  ftiumamicum^  qui  et  <egrotanti  affu- 
ity  et  njidit  ynorientem  nee  dcfeniet  nift  mortuum  ■  ita  T>emum  repetiit  domum  fuam, 
^ofl  hor as  facts  jnultas  amorte  hujus^  cum  ipje  pro  mortuo  ejfet  yeliHus  in  cubiculo^ 
uxor  tUim  idem  cubicalum  ell  ingrejfa^  ut  ex  arcaprotneret  Lodicem  ^  fine  linteamenad 
ip/um  iylo^trjuv ,  utejlmorii.  higrejfa  audit  banc  vocem^  operi  mtenta.  Quishicejl? 
terreri  ilia  ^  et  "velle  egr^di^  fed  auditur  iterum  yox  ilia  :  QuU  hie  ejl?  Ac  tandem 
comperto  ejje  mariti  yocem^  accedtt  ad  ilium  :  Q^d^  ait^  mante  ^  tu  igitur  mortuus  7ion 
es  ?  et  nos  tt  pro  mortuo  compofitum  defer'Veramm.  Ego  Vero^  rejpondit  ilk ,  yere 
viortumfui'.  fed  tta  Deo-yifum^  ut  anmiamea  rediret  ad  corpus.  Sed  tu  uxor ^  alt ^  Si 
qtJ^^abes  cibi  paratij  da  mihi  e/urio  enim.  Vixit  ilia  yeruecinam  habere  fe^  pullum 
gafffaceum  ,  et  nejcto  quid  aliud  :  fed  omnia  iticon:a^  qu£  breVt  ejfet  paratura.  Ego^ 
ait  ille^  Moram  non  fero -^  panem  habes^ait^  et  cajeum?  quum  annuijjet  ^  atque  pe- 
tiijfet  ajferri  ,  comedtt  j peH ante  uxor e  :  demde  adyocato  ^Presbyter o^  et  jufsis  exire 
€  lubiculo  omnibus  qui  ader ant -^  narrat  illi  hoc  \  Ego ^  ait ^  Vere  mortuum  fui  ^  fed  jujfn 
efl  amma  redire  ad  juum  corpus ^  utjcelu6  apperirdtn  ore  meo ,  manibu6  7neis  admijjum  , 
de  quo  nulla  unquam  cuiquam  nota  efl  Jujpicio.  Triorem  yiajnque  uxorem  jneam  ipfe. 
occidi  manihus  ineis  ^  tanta  "vafritie^  ut  omnes  res  later  et :  demde  modum  perpetrati 
fceleru  expofuit ;  nee  ita  multhpofl  expirayit,  acVeretum  mortum  ejl. 

There  is  no  necefficy  that  any  body  fliould  make  of  either  of  thefe  re- 
lations an  Article  of  his  Faith  ;  yet  I  thought  them  very  probable,becaule 
believed  by  fucha  man,  and  therefore  have  given  then\a  place  here.  So 
much  of  Miracles. 

Of  Exorcijmes  we  mull  fay  as  of  Miracles.     One   notable  example   of  a 
counterfeit  Polfeffion,  and  of  great  ftirs  likely  to  have  inllied  u^on  it  in 
France^  we  have  out  of  Thuanm^  in  our  late  Treatife  of  Enthuflajme.     The  Hi- 
flory  of  the  Boy  of  'Bilfon  is  extant  ^  who  by  the  Wiiclom  and  Sagacity  of  the 
R'  R'  F.  in  GodThomaSy  Lord  Bifliop  of  Lichfield  and  (jventry  ^  wasdifco- 
vered  to  be  an  Impoftor  on  purpofe  let  up  and  fuborned  to  promote  the  Ro- 
miili  caufe,  An.  Vom.  1620.    Such  examples  and  ftories  moft  Countries  have 
afforded  good  ftore,  which  arc  extant  in  divers  Languages.     Neither  muft 
it  be  concealed  (by  them  that  leek  truth  without  partiality)  that  lome,  once 
called  VifciplinarianSj  now  more  known  by  another  name,  have  attempted 
to  deal  in  thoie  things,  hoping  thereby  to  gain  great  advantage  to  their 
caufe.     It  was  a  famous  Story  in  Q^Eli:^abeth's  Reign,  though  now  per- 
chance out  of  the  knowledg  of  many,  and  beyond  the  remembrance  of  any 
living,    how  one  Mr.  D.  a  very  -zealous  man  of  that  Se<5t,  did  take  upon 
him  by  long  prayers  to  call  out  Divels  .  '^  .xuintained  and  ailerted  with 
great  veh^ncncy  by  him  and  fbme  others  that  favoured  that  caufe,  though 
upon  legal  examination  they  proved  otherwile ,  which  occafioned  many 
books  on  both  fides  in  thofe  day  es,  but  two,  meliorismta  ^  as  we  fay,  writ- 
ten by  Dr.  H.  concerning  Exorcifnes  ■  the  one  againft  Papifts,  the  other  a- 
gainft  QP.  I  have  them  both  fomewhere  yet,  I  hope,  but  can  not  come  at 

them' 


The    T'F^EFJCE, 


them  at  this  time,  which  is  the  caufe  that  I  cannot  particularize  that  bu- 
iineflewith  circuraftances  of  times,  and  names  or  perft)nsas  I  would.    But 
there  were  many  other  books  written  (fomevery  big,  which  I  havefeen  ) 
about  it ,   as  I  laid  betore  j   fo  that  the  whole  bufinefle  ,  with  very  little  in- 
quifition,  if  any  have  a  mind,  may  quickly  be  found  out.     One  Book- 
feller  in  Little  Sr/fJzVi did  help  mc  to  the  fight  of  fix  or  leven  at  once,  yet 
one  of  the  books  then  written,  and  as  I  was  told,  upon  this  occafion  much 
commended  unto  mc  by  Ibme  very   Learned,   to  wit,    Dr.  Jordan^  of  the 
Sujfocation  of  the  Matrix^  I  long  fought  before  I  could  meet  with  it.      And 
fuch  was  the  ignorance  of  iome  Booklellers,  that  I  could  not  perfwade  them 
■there  was  any  fuch  book  extant:    but  now  at  laft  I  have  got  it.     All  the 
ule  I  fhall  make  ot  it  at  this  time  is»  that  whereas  the  whole  drift  of  the  book 
tends  unto  this,   tofllew  the  error  of  many  in  alcribing  natural  difeales  to 
fupernatural  caules  ,  which  might  bethought  by  (bme  to  favour  their o- 
pinion  that  believe  not  Wttches^  Sec.  The  Author  doth  very  prudently  and 
pioufly  make  this  profe/Tion  inthe  Preface,  I  ilo  not  deny  but  that  God  doth  in 
thefe  dayes  work  extraordinarily  for  the  deliy^erance  of  his  children^  and  for  other  ends 
kji  hiioivn  to  him/elf ;   atui  that  among  other  there  may  be  both  poffefsions  by  the  DiVel^ 
and  ohfejiions^  and  Witch-craft,  &c.   and  dfpoJJ'efsion  alfo  through  the  Prayers  and  Slip- 
plications  of  his  jeryants^  which  is  the  only  }?ieans  left  unto  us  for  our  relief  in  that  cafe^ 
hut  fuch  examples  being<ver-f  rare  now  adayes.  Sec.      V^rf^r  all  this  I  do  not  con- 
clude that  Mr.  D.  was  guilty  of  any  Impofturc  :    he  might  do  it  through 
ignorance  being  cozened  by  others.      I  have  heard  he  was  anhoneft  man, 
and  dyed  pioully ,  and  dilclaimed  to  the  very  laft  that  he  did  any  thing  in 
that  buimelTe   otherwiie  then  Bona  Fide.     I  would  judge  charitably,  even 
of  thoie  men  that  ate  not  guilty  of  much  charity  towards  others,  whofe 
judgments  and  conlciences  will  not  fufFer  them  (though  men  of  approv- 
ed worth  and  piety  otherwiie)  to  lay  as  they  lay,  and  to  do  as  they  do  in 
all  things.     Be  it  granted  therefore,  that  this  bufinefle  of  Exorcifmes  is  ly- 
abletomuch  Impollure  :    however,  no  man  that  hath  read  the  relations 
of  men  and  women  pofleft,  in  leveral  places,  with  due  obfervation  of  cir- 
cumftances  ,  iome  of  which  relations,  befides  other  perlons  of  credit,  have 
been  atteiled  j^  yea,  Ibme  penned  and  publifhed  by  learned  Phyficiansand 
Naturalifts,  who  have  been  employed  about  the  Cure,  fiblerved  their  car- 
riage, heard  fome  of  them  fpeak  ftrange  Languages  :    lilly  women  pofleft, 
dilcourlc  of  highcft  points  of  Phyloibphy,  or  the  Mathematicks  and  the 
like.     No  man,  I  lay,  that  is  not  a  ftranger  to  thele  things  (befides  what 
fome  Travellers,  no  way  interefledin  the  caufe,  can  aver  upon  their  own 
knowledge)   will  make  any  queftion  either  of  the  real  poflcffion  of  divers, 
accordmg  to  relations  that  have  been  made,  or  of  the  Divels  (peaking  in 
them  and  by  them  when  they  have  been  Exorciledj  and  iometimes  upon 
bare  conference.     And  though  feme  Proteftants  are  of.opmion,  That  it  is 
not  lawful  or  warrantable  for  any  man  to  take  upon  him  to  Exorciie  upon 
fuch  occafions,  that  is,  (as  I  conceive)  by  way  of  abiblute  power  and  au- 
thority ,. and  by  luperftitious   wayes  and  means,  as  is  ordinarily  done  : 
Yet  where  a  man  hath  a  Calling,  as  it  he  be  lawfully  Called  to   the  Mini- 
ftry^  and  fee  over  fuch  a  Par ifh  where  any  happen  to  be  poifefled    (as  in- 
deed 


nhe    T  'R  E  F  AC E. 


B.  V.  'H  r. 


deed  iViy  kit  have  a  Pariih ,  chat  is,  right  to  a  Paridi  as  good 
rs  the  Laws  of  the  Land  can  give  me,  which  hath  been  grievouily  haunt- 
ed, though  not  altogether  in  the  fame  kind,  this  many  years,  to  the  un- 
doing of  many  there  ^  but  1  muft  not  come  near  it,  nor  have  the  benefit  oF 
the  Law  to  rerover  my  right ,  though  never  told  why )  and  he  find 
himleU  zealouily  moved  ,  yet  without  preiumption,  I  would  not .defpair, 
but  his  prayers,  wich  other  performances  of  devotion,  and  the  affiftancc 
of  (ome  others  of  the  fame  calling,  might  prove  available  before  God  : 
but  rtiil  preluppofed  ,  as  mofl:  expedient  and  neceffary,  that  the  opinion 
and  refolucion  of  lome  Learned  and  confcionable  Phyfician,  one  or  more 
be  had  in  the  ca(e ;  and  their  prefence  alfo  in  all  adions,  if  it  may  be  had, 
obtained.  Some,  it  may  be,  will  thanl«  me,  and  I  hope  it  will  offend  none, 
if  I  impart  unco  them  what  I  have  found  in  my  F.  his  Epitwierw  (or,  Vaily 
account  of  hii  life)  tending  to  this  purpole. 

.  ^ .,;:  T)f^^    60^,  Kal  Junii..  Q^tn  menifem^et  reliijuos  omnesyelis  0  Deus^Scc,- 
H'-iDC  ij   Ulume^imus^  cum  matre^  tixo'-e^  ^ffi^'^y  ^^  "^'^''^  mhtli^t)om  deQounj.  et 
nobilt  Item  fnatronu  J  D.  dcSz  i*  oris  :   qui  omnes  in  re  pie  tat  is   oi^op?ovo:;,{jtc ,  Ecclejiam 
hujus  loci  afidue  cekhraVmm.    Inter  alios  Sermmes  quoshabui  cum  D.  de  St^Pons, 
de  tfiii'iflro  proyinci^  FiVaretit  /tonus  locuti ,  cui  nomen  Mercero.      ^git  Hl^  in  eo ; 
tra8u  plufes  p-uva^  tcckfttvs  j  habitat  a.  in  loco,  dfui  dicitur  ^   Chafteau-doublcw 
jicce-yeramde  eoex  vdgi  rumonbtii  ,  quod  a)im  Ditmonaf  ejtciendi  hibe^et  '.    qu^efm^- 
ct>/i3ir5foi-  de  D.de  St  Pons  quid  ret  cjfet.     lllafendaffirmayit^pluyes  'D.emomacos 
(decern  ant  circker)    in  Ectljiam  auduclos  ^    eo  concionante  pfimiim  ^    dein  or  ante  ^ 
jmUm^ct  Confejsione  omnium  fuijje  fanatos.     Qwfdam  Demon  a  ita  eum  certis  fignti 
empij]^ ,  «f  f^s  ^p^d  omnes  fiznt  tcjlatifsima,      Torro  autem  omnes  qui  janati  junt  , 
^e!t<r.oiicm  Catholtcam  \omuyiAm  ante femper profeJJo<.     Meuerum  Veto  impatmitif' 
fime  ferre  ^  ft  quis  i^tenoquendmn  ^  u^.  fit ^  dicer et^  Merctrum  Viabolos    ejicere  ^  non 
enlm  /p,  yfenui  Ecclefiim  Dei  effe  nomtnahdwi  ,  cujm  precibus  ardentiffimis  Ddawr. 
j-espJtncrint.      'Djm  et  illiet  unyerfi  gregi  fuortimbenedicat.    Amen.  .!>s--?- 

In  En^lifh  (for  their  fakes  that  unierftmd  no  Latine,  and  that  it  be 
not  required  alwayes,  for  it  would  be  very  tedious)  this  is  the  efFe(5t , 
At  iuchatime,  in  inch  a  place,  hehadcheopporcunicy  to  meet  with  a  grave 
(whether  Lady  or  Gentlewoman)  Matron ,  one  he  had  a  very  good  opini- 
on oFj  her  nam?  M.deSt.Tons^  and  having  often  heard  by  common  re- 
port of  a  certain  Proteftant  Miniffer  that  was  faid  to  caft  out  Divels,  he 
did  accurately  inform  himfelf  by  her  (fhe  living,  it  feems,  very  near,  if. 
not  in  the  lame  parifh )  of  all  particulars  concerning  that  bufincfTc; 
who  did  averre  it  to  be  moft  true  ,  and  that  ten  ,  or  thereabouts,  Demo- 
moniacks,  or  pofTelTcd  men  (all  making  profelnon  of  tlie  Roman  Catho- 
lick  Religion)  had  been  brought  to  the  Church  ("atfeveral  times,  as  I  take 
it)  and  that  publickly,  and  by  the  genetall  conlefsion  of  all  then  pie- 
fenc,  and  by  lome.  nocable  fignes  (Ibmctimes;  at  the  going  out  of  the 
De\i!s-  they  were  ,  upon  his  Praying  after  Sermon,  all  delivered.  But 
that  he  took  it  very  hainoufly  if  any  faid,  that  he  had  caft  out  Devils ;  for, 
not  I,  faid  he,  but  the  earneft  Prayers  of  the  Church,  have  prevailed  with 
Almighty  God  to  work  this  wonderful  thing. 

As  for  Oracles :    It  is  true,  Heathens  themfelves  acknowledg,  that  fome 

■  lijii:  .  were 


The    T%EFACE. 


were  the  JLigglings  of  men.  Sometimes  Princes  j  ibractimcs  private  men  : 
(as  now  of  Religion,  of  Preaching,  and  Praying,  and  Fading  j  of  MaflTes 
and  ProceiTions :  moft  Princes  and  States  in  all  places )  made  good  ufe  of 
them  to  their  owneends  j  and  made  them  ipeak  what  themfelves  had  prom- 
pted. But  a  man  might  as  probably  argue  3  becaufe  fome  have  been  fo  frec- 
Jy  acknowledged  to  have  been  by  compad:  aad  fiibornation,  it  is  the  more 
.likely,  that  thofe  of  which  never  any  fufpicion  was,  fhould  be  true.  Wc 
read  of  many  in  Herodotus:  of  one,  which  was  contrived  by  fraud  j  but 
there  we  read  aUo,  that  when  it  came  to  be  known  (though  care  had  been 
taken  that  irmight  not :)  the  chief  Contriver,  agrcatinan,  wasbanifhed^or 
prevented  worfe,  by  avoluntaty  Exile  ;  and  the  Sacred  yir^m  or  ^Trophetejfe^ 
.depofed.     But  not  to  infill  upon  particulars,  which  would  be  long,  it  is 

'  moft  certain,  and  it  will  cleerly  appear  unto  them  that  are  well  read  in  anci- 
ent Authors  and  Hiftories,  That^llHeathens^generally  the  wifeft:  andlearn- 
edeft  of  them,  thole  efpecially,  that  lived  when  Oracles  were  moft-  frequent, 

'  did  really  believe  them  to  be,  which  they  pretended  unto  :  and  that  they 
•were  fo  indeed,  for  the  moft:  part  (taking  it  for  granted  that  their  Gods  were 
^tVf/ior  BytlSpirits)  by  many  circumitancesof  Stories,  and  by  other  lood 
proofs,  may  be  made  as  evident  :  neither  was  it  ever  doubted  or  denyed  (al- 
waycs  granted  and  prefuppofed,  that,  as  in  all  worldly  things,  much  impo- 
fture  did  intervene  and  intermingle)  by  ancient  Chriftians acknowledged,  I 
am  lure,  by  moft,  if  not  all.  But  I  have  fpokcn  of  them  elfewhere  already, 
and  therefore  will  be  the  fliorter  here. 

Ouilaft  Ohje^ion  was  :  If  there  be  VeVils  a.nd  Spirits  j'^hy  do  they  not  ap- 
pear unto  them,  who  do  what  they  can,  as  by  continual  curfes/o  by  profane 
curiofity  to  invite  them  ?     Firft,  We  fay,  «r6^e?<iVi(']«  ra' xe4ta.7<t  *ut».  1^  dvi^ixvi*Toi dt 
WeiituVj.     When  we  have  good  ground  for  the  on  ^  to  ftick  at  the  Mn^  be- 
caufe we  do  not  underftand  the  reafon,  is  as  much  as  to  fay,  that  we  think 
we  fhould  be  as  wile  as  God-     Arijlotle  did  not  meddle  with  things  that  he 
could  give  no  reaion  of  j    yet  he  did  not  deny  them  (as  we  have  fhewed^ 
and  it  is  one  thing  to  require  a  reafon  of  things  meerly  natural  j  and  another 
of  thofe  that  happen  by  a  meer  fecrct  Providence.     But  this  will  give  them 
no  great  latisfa(f^ion  who  perchance  believe  a  God  (fome)  as  much  as  they 
believe  a  Devil..    Secondly^  Therefore  we  Tay,  There  maybe  fome  natural  rea- 
fon too,  upon /i'r(/?or/a  grounds,     ^ri^otk  (as  hath  been  fhewed  elfewhere) 
compares  the  effects  oi Melancholy ^  from  whence  he  deriveth  all  kind  q^ En- 
thujiajm^    to  the  known  effeds  of  Wme>     What  is  the  reafon,  that  fome  men 
with  little  wine  will  quickly  be  drunk,  and  become  other  Creatures,  being 
deprivcdfor  the  timeof  the  ule  of  reafon  f     Others  though  they  drink  ne- 
ver lo  much,  will  fooner  burft then  reel,   or  fpeak  idly  .  as  fome  in  their 
excefs  grow  merry,  others  fad  :   fome  calm  and  better  natured  ^  others  furi- 
ous :  Ibme  talkative,  others  ftupid.     The  Devil  knowes  what  tempers  are 
beftfor  his  turn  J  and  by  Ibme  in  whom  he  was  deceived,  he  hath  got  no 
crtdit,and  wifhcd  he  had  never  meddled  with  them.     Some  men  come  into 
the  world  with  C^/'d///?/^^/  drains;  their  heads  are  full  of  myfteries  ,•  they  fee 
nothing,  they  read  nothing,  but  their  brain  is  on  work  to  pick  fbmewhat 
out  of  It  that  is  not  ordinary,-    and  out  ofthe  very  A'B  C  that  children  are 
taught,  rather  then  fail,  they  will  fetch  all  the  Secrets  of  Gods  Wifdom,  tell 

you 


The  T\SFJCE. 


you  how  the  world  was  created,  how  governed,  and  wha:  will  be  the  end  of 
all  things.  Reafonand  Senfe  that  other  men  go  by,  they  think  the  acorns 
that  the'old  world  fed  upon  j  fools  and  children  may  be  content  with  them 
but  they  fee  into  things  by  another  Li^k.  They  commonly  give  good  re- 
ifpedt  unto  the  Scriptures  (till  they  come  to  profeft  Anab^ptijis)  becaufe  they 
believe  them  the  Word  df  God  and  not  of  men  ;  but  they  referve  unto  them- 
felves  the  Interpretation,  and  founder  the  title  of  Dmw  Scripture^  worfhip 
what  their  own  phanfie  prompts,  or  the  devil  puts  into  their  heads.  Buc 
of  all  Scriptures  the  Q^evelation  and  the  obfcure  Prophefies  are  their  delight^ 
for  there  they  rove  fecurely  j  and  there  is  liot  any  thing  fo  prodigious  or  chi- 
merical, but  they  can  fetch  it  out  of  fome  Prophefie,  as  they  will  mterpret  it. 
Thefe  men,  if  they  be  upright  in  their  lives  and  dealings,  and  fear  God  tru- 
ly, it  is  to  be  hoped  that  God  will  preferve  them  from  further  evil ;  but  they 
areofa  dangerous  temper-  Charitable  men  will  picythern,  and  Ibbcrraea 
will  avoid  them.  On  the  other  fide,  fome  there  are  whofe  brains  are  of  a 
flirfand  reftive  mould  ;  it  will  not  eafily  receive  new  impre/Iions.They  will 
hardly  believe  any  thing  but  what  they  fee  ;  and  yet  rather  not  believe  their 
eye*  then  to  believe  any  thing  that  is  not  according  to  thecourleof  nature, 
and  what  they  have  been  ufed  unto.  The  devil  may  tempt  fuch  by  fenfual 
baits,  and  catch  them  •  but  he  will  not  eaiily  attempt  to  delude  them  by  ma- 
cical  Shews  and  Apparitions.  An^  wh^'-^nber  man,  that  believeth  as  a  God, 
fo  a  di  vel,doih  doubt,but  they  that  make  it  their  daily  pradice  to  damn  them- 
felves,by  fuch  horrid  oaths  and  curfes,are  as  really  pofleft,yea  far  more  in  the 
po{feis:on  of  the  devii,thea  many  thattoam  at  the  mouth,  and  fpcak  flrange 
languages  ? 

But  j'"^  Some  have  tried  and  ufed  the  means,but  could  never  lee  any  thing 
but  what  if  others  that  never  defired  it  really, but  in  fome  wanton  curiofity, 
unadviiedly,  that  they  might  be  the  better  able  to  coni-urethe  iimpHcity  of 
fome  others  as  they  thoughr,rather  then  that  their  faith  wanted  any  fuch  con- 
firmation ,  have  tryed  fome  things,or  have  been  prefent  at  fome  experiments 
and  have  feen  ( with  no  fmall  aftonifhment)  more  then  they  expeded  or  dc^ 
'fired  ?  Some  perfons  of  credit  and  quality,  I  am  fure,  have  made  it  their  con- 
fefsion  unto  me,thac  it  hath  fo  h.^pned  unto  them ;  who  have  been  fo  alFcdted 
with  it,that  they  Would  noti'or  a  world  be  fo  furprized  again. 

But4'y  and  laflly,  TheConfefsionsoflome  Magicians  are  extant  in  print, 
who  tell  very  particularly  what  means  they  ufed  ,  what  books  they  read,  &c. 
and  they  Gw  and  found  (if  we  believe  them  ,•  and  what  fliould  tempt  them 
to  lye,  no  melancholy  men,  I  know  not)  till  they  were  weary ,and  Gods  grace 
wroughtupon  their  hearts  to  bring  them  to  repentance.  There  be  fuch  confef- 
fions  extant,but  the  Readei  flial  pardon  me,if  I  give  him  no  further  account. 
It  would  much  better  becom  them  therefore,that  have  made  fuch  effays  with- 
out fucceffe,  to  repent,  and  to  be  thankful  unto  God.then  to  make  that  an  ar- 
gument, that  theres  no  divel,  and  perchance  no  God.  There  is  a  terrible  fay- 
incJ  (if  well  underffood)  in  the  Sctipturc ;  'opv^«?p(/WT«^  He  that  is  filthy  let  him 
he  filthy  Jltll  Let  them  take  heed  (I  advife  them  as  a  friend)  if  they  perfift  in 
their  hardnefs  of  heart  and  infidelity^  left  God  in  juft  judgment,r.houglichcy 
feek  ftill,and  provoke  as  niiuch  as  they  can.  will  not  fuffer  that  they  fhall  fee 
any  thing,left  they  fhoiild  fear  and  be  converted. 

^  I  come 


7 he    T%E\¥ ACE, 


I  Come  now  to  Dr.  D  e  e,  and.  to  fhU  ^ook  of  his,  which  hath  been 
the  occafion  of  all  the  Dilcourfe  hitherto.     As  for  his  Perlon  or  Pa- 
rentage ,    Education  and  the  like,  I  have  but  little  tp  lay  more  then 
what  he  faith  himfelf  in  his  firft  Letter  to  the  Emperor  (Rodolphe)  of 
Oerinanyj  that  being  yet  very  young  he  was  fought  unto   {amb'ii^eruni  me)  by 
two  Emperors  ,   CHARLsthe  5'''  and  Ferdinando  his  Brother  and  Sue-* 
cefifor  in  the  Empire.     Mr.  Cambden  indeed  in  the  year  1571  makes  honou- 
rable mention  of  him,  and  calls  him,  Nobilis  Matfmmtkus.     He  dedicated 
\      his  Mwj^f  Hierog/jip/^/c^  to  Maximilian  Succeffor  to  Ferdinando      firft 
printed  at  Jntwerp^  Jn.Dom.i^6^^  and  afterwards  at  Francford^  <59«»  and 
what  other  places  1  know  not.    In  the  year  1595.  he  did  write  (and  was 
printed  1599  I  am  fure,but  whether  before  that  or  no,  I  cannot  certainly 
tell)  J  dijcourfe  Jpologetical^  &cc.  dire<aed  to  the  then  JnhbiJJjop  of  Canterbury 
wherein  he  hath  a  Catalogue  of  books  written  by  himfelf,  printed  and  un- 
printed,  to  the  number  of  48.  in  all ,    and  doth  alfb  mention  the  books  of 
.his  Library  about  4000  volums  in  all ,  whereof  yco  ancient  Manufcripts 
Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew.    There  alfo  doth  he  produce  a  Teftimony  of  the 
Univerfity  of  Qambndg^  dated  1 548.   But  this  whole  Difcourfeof  his  being 
butfhort,  for  the  better  latisfa(5tion  of  the  Reader,  I  thought  good  to  have  it 
here  reprinted  the  next  after  this  Preface.     His  Mathematical  Preface  before 
Euclid^  is  that  I  think  which  of  all  his  writings  publifhed  hath  been  moft 
taken  notice  of  in  Englatid^  and  added  much  to  the  worth  and  commendati- 
on of  that  Edition  of  Eudtd,    He  was  a  married  man  and  had  divers  children 
as  will  appear  by  this  Relation  ;  a  great  Traveller ,  and  lived  to  a  great  age. 
But  as  I  laid  before,  I  do  not  pretend  to  give  an  account  of  his  life  in  gene- 
ral, unto  others,   which  my  felf  am  yet  aftrangerto.     What  concerneth 
this  %eUtim  I  am  to  giVe  an  account ,    and  I  hope  there  fhall  be  nothing 
wanting  to  that.     Four  things  I  propole  to  my  (elf  to  that  end 

hrji ,  Somewhat  to  confirm  the  truth  and  fincerity  of  this  whole  %e- 
lati  m. 

,    Secondly  ^  To  anfwer  fomc  Objections  that  may  be -made  againll  (bmc 
parts  of  it. 

Thirdly  J  To  give  fome  light  to  fome  places,  and  tofatisfie  the  Reader  con- 
cerning the  perfection  and  imperfection  of  the  book ,  as  alfb  ,  concerning 
the  Original  Copy. 

Fourthly^  and  laftly,  To  fhew  the  many  good-  ufes  that  may  be  made  of  all 
by  a  fober  Chriflian. 

L  It  fcems  that  Dr.  Df?  began  to  have  the  reputation  of  a  Qonjurer  be- 
times. He  doth  very  grievoufly  complain  of  ii  in  that  fp^^/^cf  to  Euclid 
but  novv  fpokcn  of ,  about  the  end  of  it ,  and  yet  there  doth  alfb 
term  himfelf,  An  aid  forworn  Mathematician.  For  my  part  w^hether 
he  could  ever  truly  be  fo  called,  I  yet  make  fome  queftion  :  But  I  am 
very  confident,  that  himfelf  did  not  know  or  think  himfelf  fo  ,  but 
a  zealous  worfliipper  of  God ,  and  a  very  free  and  fincere  Chriitian. 
How  this  is  to  be  reconciled  with  the  truth  o^  ihis  Relation  ^  fhall  be  af' 
tcrwardsconfideredof     For  the  truth  and  fincerity  of  the  %elation^  I  hope 

D  no 


The^^iF  A  C^' 


man 
cou 


^^..Id  be  fufpedecl  co  Have  devifed  and  invented  thefe  things  in  his  oWii 
brain  to  abufc  the  world.  I  fhould  be  forry  my  name  iliould  appear 
jn  any  kind  to  any  book  lyable  to  fuch  a  Rifpition  •  -^^-^  :!ic  very  name 
atid'  4Vedit  of  that  To  much  and  (o  defcrvedly  prized  Library  from 
whence  this  is  pretended  to  be  taken  ,  is  fufficienc  (with  civil  undcr^ 
tending  nien )  to  prevent  the  groflenefle  of  fuch  a  miftake.  Befides 
thf  GrKrinal  Copy  it  fclf ,  all  written  with  Dr.  Dm  own  harid,  there 
kept  and  preferved.  But  by  Truth  and  Sincerity,  intending  not  only  Dr. 
7)ce's  fidelity  in  relating  what  himfelf  believed ,  but  alio  the  reality  of 
thofe  things  that  he  fpeaks  of,  according  to  his  relation  :  his  only  (but 
areat  and  dreadful)  error  being,  that  he  miftook  falfe  lying  Spirits  for 
ATjgelsof  Light ,  the  Diyelof  Hell  (as  we  commonly  term  him)  for  the 
God  of  Heaven.  For  the  Truth  then,  and  Sincerity  or  'Reality  of  the  Ela- 
tion in  this  fenfe,  I  fhall  firft  appeal  to  the  Book  it  felf.  I  knoW  it  is 
the  fafliionof  many  (I  will  not  fay  that  (I  never  did  it  my  felf)  that  arc 
birers  of*  books,  they  will  turn  five  or  fix  leaves,  if  they  happen  up- 
on lomewhat  that  pleafeth  their  fancy ,  the  book  is  a  good  book  ,  and 
when  they  have  bought  it,  it  concerneth  them  to  think  fo,  becaufe  they  have 
paid  for  it :  but  on  the  other  fide,  if  they  light  upon  fomcwhat  that  doth 
not  pleafe  (which  may  happen  in  the  beft)  they  are  as  ready  to  condemn 
and  c^ftaway.  It  is  vpry  polfible  that  fome  fijch  buyer  lighting  upon  this  , 
and  in  it,  upon  fome  places  here  and  there,  where  fome  odd  uncouth  things 
may  cffeV  themfelves ;  things  ridiculous,  incredible  to  ordinary  fen/e and 
conik!i6tion,he  may  be  teady  to  judge  of  the  whole  accordingly.  But  for  all 
this  1  will  in  the  firft  place  appeal  to  the  book  it  felf,-  but  with  this  refpe^  to 
the  Reader ,  that  he  will  have  patience  to  read  in  order  one  Fourth  part  of  the 
book  at  leaft  before  he  judge ;  and  if  by  that  tinie  he  be  not  conviaed^he  fhall 
have  my  good  will  to  give  it  over.  Not  but  that  all  the  reft,  even  to  the  end, 
doth  help  very  well  to  "confirm  the  truth  and  reality  of  the  whole  Story  : 
but  becaufe  1  chink  there  is  fo  much  in  any  fourth  part,  if  diligently  read^and 
with  due  confidcration,  that  I  defpair  of  his  aflent,that  is  not  convidied  by- 
it.  For  my  part,when  the  book  was  firft  communicated  un- 
sv,  rkmd*  c«/o» Knight     ^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^^  Right  wotthy  Gentleman  who  is  very  ftudi- 

ous  to  purchafeand  procure  fiich  Records  and  Monuments 
as  may  advantage  the  truth  of  God  (all  truth  is  of  God)  and  the  honour  of 
this  Land,  following  therein  the  example  of  his  noble  Progenitor ,  by  his 
very  name  ,  Sit1{ol)ert  Cotton,  known  to  all  the  Learned  as  far  as  Eu^ 
rope  extendeth.  I  read  it  curforily  becaufe  I  was  quickly  convinced  iti 
my  felf  that  it  could  be  no  counterfeit  immaginarie  bufineflc  ,  and  was 
very  defirous  to  fee  the  end ,  fo  far  as  the  book  did  go-  Afterwards  , 
when  lunderftoodthatthe  faid  worthy  Gentleman  (efpecially, as  I  fuppolc, 
relyino  upon  my  Lsrd  of  Armagh's  judgment  and  teftimonie ,  which  we  liavc 
beforcfpokcnof)  was  willing  it  fliouldbe  publifhed,  and  that  he  had  com- 
■        ^      ■■■'■''.  ^  -"»   -v.       ,  mitted 


The  T\SF  ACE, 


mitccd  the  whole  biirinefs  unco  me ;  I  rcid  it  over  very  cxadly  ,  and  took 
notes  of  the  moft  remarkable  paflages  (as  they  appeared  unto  me)  truly 
I  was  fo  much  confirmed  in  this  firft  opinion  by  my  lecond  reading,  that- 
I  fhall  not  be  afraid  to  profefs  that  I  never  gave  mo^r  credit  to  any  Hu- 
mane Hiftory  of  former  times.  All  thmgs  feer.ied  unto  me  fo  fimply  , 
and  yet  fo  ate '-'•rely  ,  '  and  with  fo  much  confirmation  of  all  manner 
of  circumftances  written  and  delivered  ,  that  I  cannot  yet  fatisfie  my  felf, 
but  all  judicious  Readers  will  be  of  my  opinion.  But  neverthelcls,  to 
help  them  that  trufV  not  much  to  their  own  judgments ,  let  us  fee  what 

Fir(i   I  would  have  them.,  that  would  be  further  fatisfied,  to  read  Dr. 
'Dam  that  forecited  Preface,  where  he  doth  plead  his  own  caufe,  to  acquit 
himfclf  of  chat  grievous  crime  and  imputation  of  a  Qonjurer.     But  that  was 
written     I  mull  confefs,  long  before  his  Communication  with  Spirits: 
yet  it  isfomewhacto  know  what  opinion  he  had  then  of  them  that  deal 
witk  Divels  and  evil  Spirits.      But  after  he  was  made  acquainted,  and  in 
great  dealing's  with  them,  and  had  in  readincfs  divers  of  chcfchis  books, 
or  others  o?  the  fame  Argument,    containing  their  ieveral  conferences 
and  communications,  to  rhew,  and  the  manner  of  their -appearing  cxadlly 
fct  down  •    obferve,  I  pray,  with  what  confidence  he  did  addrefs  himfelf 
to  the  areateft  and  wileft  in  Europe.     To  Queen  Elizabeth  often ,    and  to 
her  Council,  as  by  many  places  of  this  Relation  doth  appear  ;   but  more 
particularly  by  his  Letter  to  Sir  Frmcis  Walfingham^  Secretary,  &c.     That 
he  did  the  like  to  Kins;  >»JeJ  and  his  Councel,   may  eafily  be  gathered  by 
the  Records  (in  this  %eUtm)  of  1607.  but  much  defedive.     But  then  to 
the  Emperor  <2^o^o/p/.^e ,  to5ff/>^e«K.lngof  foUnd^  and  divers  other  Princes 
and  their  Deputies  •  thewifeft  and  learnedft,  their  fcveral  Courts  did  af- 
ford for  the  time  :   the  particulars  of  all  which  addreffes  and  tranfadions 
are  ver-  exadly  fct-  down  in  the  book.     Nay,  fuch  was  his  confidence,  that 
had  it  not  been  for  the  Kuncuts  Aj^aflolim  his  appearing  againft  him  at  the 
Emperors  Court  by  order  from  the  Pope,  he  was,  as  by  fomc  places  may 
becolledcd,  rcfolved  for  5(o;ne  alfo  ,  not  doubting  but  he  fliould  approve 
himfelf  and  his  doings  to  the  Pope  himfelf  and  his  Cardinals.    I-  i^W  thefc 
his  addrelTes  and  applications  being  ftill  very  ready  to  impart  all  things 
unto  them  that  would  entertain  them  with  that  refped  he  thought  they 
deferred,  yea  readily,  w^'-l".  i^  very  obfervable,  even  to  receive  them  into 
this  Myliical  Society,  whom  he  thought  worthy,  and  in  fomc  capacity  to 
promote  the  defign  5  as  de  faBo  he  did  divers  in  feveral  places :     AlbertusA^ 
iafco   Prince  Palatine  of  ^olonia^  fuccius  a  learned  man,  and  Prince  'Xpfem- 
lenm  Gewuny  ^  who  were  long  of  the  Society ,  befides  fome  admitted  to 
fome  Adions  for  a  while  ,  asSt^i^^wKing  of  fdani^  and  lome  others.     Wc 
will  eafily  ^rant  (as  elfewhere  hath  been  treated  and  handled  at  large)  that  a 
diftempered  brain  may  fee,  yea,  and  hear  ftrange  things,  and  entertain  them 
with  all  pofiible  confidence,  as  real  things ,  and  yet  ail  but  lancy,  without 
any  realfound  or  Apparition.    But  thefcfightsand  Apparitions  that  Dr.  Vee 
gives  here  an  account,  are  quite  of  another  nature  ;   yea,  though  poflibly  the 
Divcl  misht  reprefent  divers   of  thefe    things   to   the   fancy  mwardly 
°         ^  Q  J  which' 


The    T%EF ACE^ 


which  appeared  outwardly  :  Yet  of  another  nature,  I  lay,  au^Jiot  without 
the  intervention  and  operation  of  Spirits ,  as  will  cafily  appear  to  any  niaii 
by  the  particulars.  Belidcs  the  long  Speeches,  Difcourfes,  luLerlQcutions 
upon  all  occafions  and  occurrences  in  the  presence  of  more  then  one.al- 
wayes  j  and  externally  audible  to  different  perfons,  for  the  mort:  part  or  very 
frequently.  That  thele  things  could  not  be  the  operation  . of  ^  diflem- 
pered  Fancy  ,   will  beafufficient  evidence  to  any  rational  man.  ,,   ..    . , 

Aeain,  let  h'"  afual  preparations  and  Prayers  againft  an  Apparition  or 
Adion  (as  he  called  them)  his  extraordinary  prayers  upon  iome  extra- 
ordinary occafions ,  as  upon  Edward ^liey  his  temporary  repentance,  and 
another  for  him  when  he  was  about  to  forfake  him  (in  Latins  a  long  one; 
Stephen  King  of  foland  being  thenprelcnt.  And  again,  when  his  Son  A- 
thur  was  to  be  initiated  to  thefe  Myftical  Operations  and  Apparitions,  mthe 
place  of  Edfi^ard  I\elley  ,  and  the  like.  And  again,  his  Humility,  Piety  , 
Patience  (O  what  pity  that  fuch  a  man  fliould  fall  into  fuch  a  dclufion  ! 
butwe  fhallconfider  of  the  caufes  in  its  right  place  afterwards)  upon  all 
occafions  temptations ,  diftrefles ,  moft  eminent  thioughout  the  whole 
Book.  Let  thefe  things  be  well  confidered ,  and  above  the  refl:,  his  large 
and  pundual  relation  of  that  fad  abominable  ftory  of  their  Tromijaious  ^  car- 
mi  CopuUtm,  under  the  pretence  of  obedience  to  God. •  Let  thefe  things, 

I  fay  be  well  confidered,  and  1  think  no  man  will  make  any  queftion  but 
the  poor  man  did  deal  with  all  pofTible  fimplicity  and  fincerity ,  to  the  ut- 
raoitof  his  underftanding  at  that  time.  And  truly,  this  one  thing  (aswc 
faid  before)  excepted ,  his  miftaking  of  evil  Spirits  for  good,  it  doth  not 
appear  by  any  thing  but  that  he  had  his  underftanding,  and  the  perfe^c 
uCe  of  his  Rcafon  to  the  very  laft,  as  well  as  he  had  had  any  time  of  his 

life. 

Again,  let  it  be  confidered,  that  hecarryed  with  him  where  eVer  he  went 

A  Stone     which  he  called  hh  Jn^dicall  Sione.,  as  brought  unto  him  hy  an  Ah- 

oel    but  by  a  Spirit  fun  enough  ,   which  he  fihewed  unto  many ;  to  the  Emperor 

among  others,  or  the  Emperors  Deputy , Dr.  C«''fi",  as  I  remember :  But  more 

of  this  Stotie  afterwards.    We  may  thereiore  conclude  fi.irely  enough  ,  Thac 


I 

thoic  things  ^^         .  ^ 

miftaken  as  though  I  intended  that  w^hatfoever  the  Diveldid  fcem  to  do 
or  reprelcnt ;  it  was  ^ally  and  Subflantially  as  it  Teemed  and  appeared ,  thac 
would  be  a  great  and  grofs  miftake.  The  very  word  Jpparition  doth  rather 
import  the  contrary.  All  I  underiiand  by  'Sjalicy,  is,  that  what  things  ap- 
peared ,  they  did  fo  appear  by  the  power  and  operation  of  Spirits,  adually 
prefcnt  and  working ,  and  were  not  the  eflFeds  of  a  depraved  fancy  and 
imagination  by  meer  natural  caufes.  By  which,  ilrange  things,  I  con fels, 
may  be  prefcnted  and  apprehended  too,  (ometimes  by  the  parties  with  all 
confidence ,  as  we  faid  before,  though  all  be  but  fancy  and  imagination. 
But  all  circumftances  well  confidered,  make  this  Cafe  here  to  be  ot  another 
nature  ^  and  it  may  be  it  was  the  policy  of  thefe  Spirits  to  joyn  tipo  of 
purpofe  in  this  bufinefs,  to  make  the  truth  and  reality  of  it  the  more  un- 

que- 


7he    T  PREFACE, 


oueftionable  ,•  hoping  (if  God  had  given  way)  they  fliould  havepafTed,  uk 
time  for  good  Spirits  abroad  generallyj  and  then  we  fhould  have  lecn  what 
they  would  have  made  of  it.  Fro-,  ielle  beginnings  ,  I  am  fure,  great- 
eft  confufions  have  proceeded  and  prevailed  in  the  world,  as  we  fhall  fliew 
elfewhere.  And  fince  that  in  all  this  bufinefs,  as  we  faid  but  now  ,  Dr. 
"Dee  did  not  deal  alone ,  but  had  a  conftant  Partner  or  Afsilfant,  whom 
fometimes  himfelf  calleth  his  Seer^  ot  Skryer^  one  by  name  Edward  i\elly  ;  it 
will  be  requifite  before  we  proceed  further,  that  we  give  fome  account  of 
him  alio.  According  to  Dr.  Dee's  own  relation  here,  I^?i.2)ow.  i^Sj.Jprilj^ 
Trebonit :  in  the  particulars  of  his  Son  Arthur's  Con[ecra(ion  (after  his  manner 
which  he  calls,  Hn  ojf eying  and prefentirig  of  him  to  the  fervice  of  God: )  Uriel 
(one  of  his  chiefeft  Spirits)  was  the  author  of  their  ConjunBion:  but  when 
and  howithapned  (being  but  obiter  mentioned  there)  we  do  not  find  any 
where ;  and  more  then  what  I  find  here  I  have  nothing  to  fay  :  For  certain 
it  is  by  this  whole  ftory  ^  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  it,  that  ^lley 
was  a  great  Conjurer  ,  one  that  daily  converfed  by  fiich  art  as  is  uled  by 
ordinary  Vlagicians,  with  evil  Spirits,  and  knew  them  to  be  Co.  Yet  I 
would  luppole  that  he  was  one  of  the  beft  lort  of  Magicians ,  that  dealt 
with  Spirits  by  a  kind  of  Cow?/M«J  (^as  is  well  known  (ome  do}  and  not  by 
any  QompaEl  or  agreement  :^  this  may  probably  be  gathered  from  fimdry 
places.  But  that  he  was  a  Conjurer,  appearereth  firft  by  that,  where  he 
profFered  to  raife  fome  evil  Spirit  before  the  PoliiTi  Prince  Palatine ,  Albert 
X^sky  (of  whom  more  by  and  by)  for  a  proof  of  his  Art.  But  D^.Dee 
Would  notfiifFerhim  to  do  it  in  his  houie.  Wicked  fpirits  are  caft  out  of 
him  to  the  number  of  1 5 .  p.  5  2 .  But  I  make  no  great  matter  of  that  in  point 
of  proof,  becaulc  all  there  upon  his  bare  report  only.  But  ieej).6^.  &c. 
where  it  is  laid  to  his  charge,  and  he  anfwereth  for  himfelf  and  his  Spirits. 
See  alio  where  at  laft  he  yielded  to  bury  not  to  burn  his  Magical  books. 
But  read  his  own  confefsion  (where  you  fhall  find  him  Ipeak  likeonethat 
knew  very  well  what  did  belong  to  thcArt^  and  the  record  made  by  Dr. 
Dee  concerning  a  flirewd  conteit  that  hapned  between  Dr.  Dee  and  him  , 
(it  was  about  lome  Magical  thingsj  wherein  EdivardK^lly  carried  himfelf  io 
fiercely,  that  Dr.  Dee  being  afraid  of  his  life,  was  forced  to  call  for  help. 
Perufe  well  this  place  and  I  prelume  you  will  require  no  further  li^ht  as 
to  this  particular  concerning  B^lly, 

As  for  the  feveral  Epijlles  (in  Latin  moft)  that  will  be  found  here,  as  alio 
Narratives  of  leveral  meetings  and  conferences,  they  carry  fb  much  light 
with  them,  bein^  let  out  with  fo  ma »^'- remarkable  circumftances  of  time 
place,  perlons,  &c.  that  no  man  of  judgment  that  hath  any  knowledge 
of  the  world,  will  or  can  make  any  icruple  of  thcfincerity  and  fidelity  of 
cither  reports  or  Deeds  and  monuments  (fuch  I  account  the  Letters  to  be} 
herein  contained.  A  man  might  with  little  labour  (that  had  all  kind  of 
books  at  command)  have  found  lomewhat  concerning  moft  (outlandifh) 
perlons  in  them  mentioned.  I  could  notintend  it,  and  I  think  it  would 
have  been  a  needlefs  labour.  If  any  make  any  queftion  let  them*  make 
fearch  ,  I  dare  warrant  it  unto  them  they  (hall  find  all  things  to  agree  pun- 
jftually-    But  becaufe  Albert  Laiky  (next  to  Edward  K^lley)  is  the  man  moft 

in- 


The  T%BF  A  Q  '^- 


#ht^treted  in  this  ftory,  I  will  give  you  fome  account  of  him  out  of  Mr; 

Qambdm\\\s' Annals .  ,.  ' 

■AnnoDom.i5B^.    E  Tolonia^   ^ufsi^  vicina  hac  ^fiafe  venit  in  Jtiglkm  ut 

^'ohiain  inVtferetj  Albertus  Ahico^TaUtmHi  Siradienfts  Vir  erudkm^  corporis  linsa- 

mentis  hctrbapmrnji/sinhi^  1^(?if«  decero,  <^  perVenufio -^   qui  perbenigne  ah   ipfa  mbi- 

hhiifqtic  magnoqiie  homre  <(y  Imtitm^  ei  dh  Accadtmia  Oxonienft  uuditis  obkSlationibm^ 

■htqiii  Hwiis  Jpeclaculis  exceptus  ^  poft  4.  menfes    are  alieno  opprejfus ,    clam  re- 

cejsii: 

But  of  all  Letters  here  exhibited,  I  am  moft  taken,  I  muftconfefs,  with 
the  Bifliops  Letter  that  was  2>luncm  JpoJloHcus :  he  feemes  to  rac  to  fpeak 
tothecaie  very  pertinently  {tzkc 'Puccius  his  account  along  m  his  long 
letter  to  Dr.  Dee^  of  his  conference  with  the  faid  Bifliop  concerning  the 
lame  bulinefsjand  to  havecarryed  himfelf  towards  Dr^Vee  very  moderate- 
ly and  friendly. 

1 1.  Now  to  Objedions : 

The  firfl:  fhall  be  this :     Although  'tis  very  probable  that  Dr.  Dee  him- 
felf dealt  fimply  and  lincerely  ^  yet  iince   he  himfelf  faw  nothing  (for  lb 
himfelf  acknowledgeth  in  fome  places)   but  by  Ks^Iefs  eyes,  and  heard  no- 
thing but  with  his  ears.      Is   it  not  pofsible   that  Bailey  being  a  cun- 
ning^ man  ,  and  well  pradtifed  in  tliefe  thir;gs  might  impofe  upon  the 
credulity  of  Dr.  Dee  ( a  good  innocent  man  )   and  the  rather,  becaufe  by 
this  office  under  the  Dodor  he  got  50  /.  by  the  year ,  as  appearcth.     Truly 
this  isplaufibleas  it  is  propofed ;  and  Hkc  enough  that  it  might  go  a  great 
way  with  them  that  ate  foon  taken,  and  therefore  feldom  lee  anything  in 
the  truth  or  true  nature  of  it,  but  in  the  outward  appearanceof  it  only. 
But  read  and  obferve  it  diligently  and  you  will  find  it  far  otherwife  :     It  is 
true  indeed,  that  ordinarily.  Dr.  Dfg  faw  not  himfelf;  his  bufinefswas  to 
write  what  was  feen  (but  in  his  prefence  though)   and  heard   by  %%. 
Yet  that  himfelf  heard  often  immediately  appeareth  by  many  places ;  I  lliall 
not  need  any  quotations  for  that  himfelf  feeleth  as.well  as  ^elley.     In  the 
relation  of  the  Holj  Stone  ,  how  takcfj  away  by  one  that  came  in  at  a  win- 
dow in  the  fhape  of  a  man  ,  and  how  reftored  ■  both  Jaw  certainly.     In  the 
ftory  of  the  Holy  ^oohj  how  burned  and  how  reftored  again  (part  of  them  at 
leaft)   which  Dr  D^e  made  a  great  Miracle  of,  as  appeareth  by  lomeofthofc 
places  J  there  alfo  both  faw  certainly^    And  Jlben  Lasky^  tU  Tolonian  Talatine 
pw  as  'well  as  l\ellcy,     Befides,    it   doth  clearly  appciir  throughout  all  the 
book  that  Kelley  (though  fometimes  with  much  adoe  perfwaded  for  a  while 
to  think  better  of  them)  had  generally  no  other  opinion  of  thefe  Appa- 
litions  but  that  they  were  meet  illuiions  of  theDivel    and  evil  Spirits,  fuch 
as  himfelf  could  command  by  his  art  when  he  lifted  ,  and  was  acquainted 
with  ,  infomuch  that  we  find  him  for  this  very  caufc  forfaking  ,  or  defirous 
to  forfake  Dr.  T)ee^  who  was   much  troubled  about  it;    and  is  forced  in  a 
place  to  (P.w/i  A^  Som/ unto  him  (to  ufe  his  own  words)  that  it  was  not  io, 
andt^at  they  were  good  Spirits  fent  from  God  in  great  ravourunto  them. 
But  fofall  this  Kelley  would  notbefatisfied,  but  would  have  his  Declarati- 
on or  Proteftation  of  his  fufpition  to  the  contrary  entred  into  the  book . 
which  you  fhall  find,  and  it  wiU  be  worth  your  reading.     I  could  further 

al- 


The  T\SF  ACE, 


allcdge,  that  if-  a  man  conlideis  the  things  delivered  here  upon  fcveral  occa- 
iions,  being  of  a  different  nature,  (bme  Moral,  (omePhyfical,  fome  Me- 
taphylical,  and  Theological  of  higheft  points  (though  romecimcs  wild  e- 
nough,  and  not  warr^  ntable  j  yet  for  the  mod  part  very  remote  from  vulgar 
capacities}  he  will  not  eafily  believe  that  i\eiley^  who  fcarce  underftood  La- 
tine)  not  to  fpeak  of  fome  things  deliverer!  \^^  Jreek  in  lome  places  >  and  be- 
tookhimfcif  to  theftudy  of  Logick  long  after  he  had  entred  himfelf  into 
this  couric  ,  could  utter  fuch  things  :  no,  nor  any  man  living  perchance, 
that  had  not  made  it  his  ftudy  all  his  life-time.  But  that  which  muft  needs 
end  this  quarrel  (if  any  man  will  be  pertinacious)  and  put  all  things  out  of 
doubt,  is,  that  not  I'\clley  only  ferved  in  this  place  of  Seer  or  Skrye/\  but  o- 
thers  alfb ,  as  his  fon  Arthur^  and  in  his  latter  dayes,  when  t\(lley  was  cither 
gone  or  lltk,  one  "BartholomeTi^j  as  will  be  found  in  all  the  Jfliom  a.nd  Ap- 
paritions of  che  year  1607.  which  (as  I  fulped-)  was  thelaft  year  of  theDo- 
dbors  life,  or  beyond  which  I  think  he  did  not  live  long. 

Secondly^  It  may  be  objed:cd  ,  or  ftuck  at  Icaft,  How  Dr.  Dee^  fb  good  Co 
innocent,  yea,  fo  pious  a  man,  and  fo  fin  cere  a  Chriftian  as  by  thefc  pa- 
pers fhis  delufion  and  the  efFcd:s  of  it  ftill  excepted)   he  doth  feem  to  have 
been  ,   God  would  permit  fuch  a  one  to  be  To  deluded  and  abufed  ,    io  rackt 
in  his  foul,  lo  hurried  in  his  body  for  To  long  a  time,  nocwichffandinCThis 
frequent,  carnefl;,   zealous  prayers  and  addrclfe^  unto  God,  by  evil  Spirits 
(even  to  his  dying  day,  for  ought  we  know)  as  he  is  hnrt  hy  his  ownrela* 
tion  (ct  out  unto  us  ?     Truly,  if  a  man  fiiail  coniider  the  whole  carriage 
of  this  bufineflc,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  according  tj  this  true  and 
faithful   (for  I  think  I  may  lb  Ipeak  with  confidence)  account  of  it  here 
prcfented  unto  us ,  this  poor  man,  how  from  time  to  time  fhamefully  , 
giofly  delayed,  deluded,  quarrelled  without  caufc,  ffill  toled  on  with  fome 
fhetfvs  and  appearances,  and  yet  ftill  fruftrated  and  put  off:     his  many- 
pangs  and  agonies  about  it,  his  fad  condition  after  lomany  years  toil,  tra- 
vel,  drudgery  and  earneftexpedation,  attheverylaft  (as  appeireth  by  the 
AtliQus  and  apparitions  of  the  year  1607.)  I  cannot  tell  whether?I  Oiould  make 
him  an  objed;  ot  more  horror  or  compaffion  ,-  but  of  both  certainly  in  a 
great  meaflue  to  any  man  that  hath  any  fenfe  of  Humanity,  and  in  the  ex- 
amples of  others  of  humane  frailty  :     and  again,  any  regard  of  parrsand 

worth,  fuch  as  were  in  this  man  in  a  hii^h  decree.     True  it  is,  that  he  had 

111/"  « 

yo)i«i  wi  thai  and  comforts,  imaginary  ,delufory  ,  it  is  true;  yet  fuch  as  he  en- 
joyed and  kept  up  his  heart,  and  made  him  outwardly  chearf ul  often  times , 
I  make  noqueifion  ;  luchasthe  Saints  (as  they  call  themfelves )  and  Schtf- 
matich  of  thefe  and  former  times  have  ever  been  very  prone  to  boaft  of,  per- 
fwading  themlelves  that  they  are  the  ejfeHs  of  Gods  blelTed  Spirit.  B  ut  even 
inthele  his  joys  and  comforts,  the  fruits  and  fancies  of  his  deluded  foul  (as 
m  many  othersof  adiftcmperedbrain)  is  not  he  an  objed:  of  great  compaf- 
paflion  to  any,  both  fober  and  charitable  ?  If  this  then  were  his  cafe  indeed, 
what  fliall  u'e  fay  ?  if  nothing  elle,  I  know  not  but  it  ought  to  latisfie  a 
rational,  iober,  humble  man:  If  we  fay,  That  it  is  not  in  man  to  give  an 
account  of  all  Gods  judgments,  neither  is  there  any  ground  for  us  tomur- 
mute  becauiewedonotundcrftandthemjOrthat  they  often  iecm  contrary 

to' 


The    T%EFACE. 


to  the  judgment  of  humane  reafbn,  becaufe  it  is  againft  all  Reafon  as  well  as 
Religion, to  believe  that  a  creature  fo  much  inferior  to  God,by  nature  as  man 
is  fhould  lee  every  thing  as  he  ieeth,and  think  as  he  thinks  j  and  confequent- 
ly'judgeand  determine  inandof  all  things  as  God  judgeth  and  determineth. 
The  Apoftle  therefore  not  without  caulc  ,  would  have  ail  private  judg- 
ments  (for  of  publick  for  the  maintenance  of  peace  and  orjer  among  men, 
it  is  another  calc)deferr'd  to  that  time,  when  the  hearts  of  all  menjhall  be  laid  open^ 
ail  hidden  things  and  Jecret  counfels  feveakd.     But  we  have  enough  to  fay  in  this 
caie  without  it.      For  if 'Pn^^and  Qirioftty  were  enough  to  undoe  our  firft 
Parent,  and  in  him  all  mankind,  when  otherwile  innocent,  and  in  pof- 
leOionof  Paradife.     Should  we  wonder  if  it  had  the  lame  event  in  Dr. 
Dee  'though  otherwife,  as  he  doth  appear  tons,  innocent,   and  well  qua- 
lified?   That  this  w^as  his  caie  and  error,  I  will  appeal  to  hisownconfef- 
iion  (though  he  makes  it  his  boaft)  in  more  then  one  of  his  Letters  orad- 
drefles,  where  he  profeCfeth ,   That  for  diyers  years  he  had  been  an  earnejl  Juter  un- 
to God  in  prayer  for  Wifdom-^  that  is,  as  he  interprets  himielf.    That  he  might  un- 
derfland  the  fecrets  of  Is.ature  that  had  not  been  reVeakd  unto  men  hitherto ;   to  the 
end    ashe  profedeth,  and  his  own  deceitful  heart  it  maybe  fuggefted  un- 
to him    That  he  vvght  glorlfe  God-^  but  certainly,  that  himfelf  might  become 
a,  vlorious  man  in  the  worfd,  and  be  admired,  yea,  adored  every  where  almoft, 
as  hernight  befureitjivould  be,  had  hecompalTed  his  delire.     And  what 
do  wethmk  fliould  put  him  upon   fuch  a defire,  with  hopes  to  obtain  it, 
but  an  opinion  he  had  of  himfelf  as  an  extraordinary  man,  both  for:  parts  ^ 
and  for  favour  with  God  ?    But  however ,  had  he  been  to  the  utmoft  of  what 
he  could  think  of  himfelf,  befides  his  Spiritual  pride  of  thinking   io  of 
himielf  (as  great  a  fin  as  any  in  the  eyes  of  God  )  his  praying  for  fiich  a 
thing  with  fo  much  importunity,  was  a  great  tempting  ot  God,  anddeferv- 
ine  <Treatefi:  judgments.     Had  he  indeed  been  a  Inter  unto  God  for  fuch 
Wijdom2.s,thc  Prophet  Jim/j/c  defcribeth   (  ii.v.i^^z^.)  Let  not  the  Wfeman 
olorie  m  ha  wfdom^  i^c    but  let  him  that  gloritth^<S'C.    And  for  luch  knowledg 
as  our  Saviour  commandeth  ,  'joh.vj.-^.   ^nd  this  is  life  eter?ial^  that  they  may 
knol}?  thie^tcc.    And  his  blelfed  Apoftle  (  i  Cor.i  t.i.)   For  1  determined  not  to 
know  any  things  &c.  he  had  had  good  warrant  for  his  prayers,  and  it  is  very 
likely  that  God  would  have  granted  him  his  requeft,  fo  far  as  might  have  ' 
concerned  his  own  falvation  and  eternal  happinefs.     Befides,  it  is  lawful, 
(nay  fit)  for  a  man  to  pray  for  Gods  blefiing  upon  his  labours,  for  com- 
petency of  wit  and  capacity  that  he  maydo  well  in  his  vocation  and  glori- 
fie  God.     But  for  a  man  to  afpircto  fuch  eminency  above  other  men,  and 
~by  means  that  are  not  ordinary  (as  that  conceited  fhylo/ophers  Stone ^  and  the 
like)  and  to  intereft  God  by  earneft  folicitations  in  his  ambitions  extrava- 
gant defires;  that  God,  who  hath  faid  of  himielf,  l%it  here fijieth the  proud ^ 
but  giVeth  grace  untt  the  humble ,  muft  needs  be  fo  great  and  fo  high  a  provoca- 
tion (if  well  confidered)  ^s  that  I  begin  to  doubt  whether  it  be  charity  to 
pity  him  that  fuffered  fo  juftly  and  defervedly.     1  do  not  know  but  it  is 
as   lawfuU  few:  any  man  obfcurely  born  to  pray  tor  a  Kingdom  ,-  for  a 
Common  Souldier  that  he  may  have  ftrength  to  encounter  thoulands,  or 
f<ir  an  ordinarie  Maid ,  that  flie  may  become  the  faireft  of  women.      In 

all 


7he    T%EFACE. 


all  cKcfe  it  is  poffible  ro  glorifie  God,  We  grant,  were  itiTtJor  uscopre- 
icpi?)e  unto  Cod,     neglcdting  chofe  that  lie  hath  appointed. -by  what-. «-n^aiis 
he  (Iiocld  be  glorified,-  and  could  we  iecure  ouc  Selves  that,  jnprecendiag  to 
Godsglouy^wedo  not  feck  oar  own.  Jwifh  that  our  great  undercak(^?i":4Hd 
reformeis'Cfuch  is  their  wifdom  they  think)  pfArcs  and  Scici^x^ps  wouj^Fi- 
oufly  thiiik  of  this;  they  efpeciiliy  who  take  upon  themfclves^q  makealJ  men 
wile  and  of  one  mind,  and  to  reconcile  all  doubts  and  difficulties  in  l^ligJQa, 
and  otherwilc;  ina  word,to  makeTriithtpbeimbracedby  all  men.  Sh(^uld 
thefe  men  tell  us  that  if  they  had.hadj:heCreatingof  the  world^  and  thepiKle- 
.tingof  all  things  (and  there  be,  Ithink,.iothe  world  that  have  (aid  little-^ijs) 
from  thebeginning,they  would  have  made,  an  other  giiefs  of  things;  th^a  t^fya 
had  done;^J('e  would  have  coniiderd  of  it  perchance  what  might  be  theground 
..in  any  rnort?!  man  of  ftich  wonderful  confidence.  But  ^uch'b^ingtheqQn^i- 
•'tion  of  the  world^as  it  is,and  l]ich  of  men^tiaturallyjor  tolpeak  asa  Chi|iftia:n, 
fincethe  bllof/<tij>«,and.thecQniequences  of  it,  thecinfeofGod^&c.to  makne 
all  men  Wife,  of  onemind^  good,  religious,  without  an  infinite  omnipQt^gt 
power,fuch  as  of  nothing  was  able  to  create  a  world  :  cananymanfrober^nd 
wife)  hear  it-hear  it  With  patience,  that  thinks  it  impoilible,  yea  ftrange,  that 
Caftles  fliould  be  btwltin  the  air  ,  pt  the  heavens  battered  with  great  guns'^? 
And  yet  fuch  booksare  read  ,  'yea  and  miich  fet  by,  by  fome  men.  My  judg- 
rocnt  is,  That  they  are  :o  bcpi|;tyed  (if  diilemper  be  the  caufe^as'l  believe  it  js 
in  Ibm.e  jthat  boait  of  fuch  things;   but  if  wife  and  politick,co  getcrediL^nd 
rn^)ney(as  iome  I  believe)  it  is'a:gi:eat  argument  of  their  c6nfidencej,that  there 
h^nany  in  the  wotd  that  are  npx,very  wife^     But  to  return  to  Dx.D^e-:    In 
might  be  fuiLuci  added  and  proved  by  exarriples,  that  fome  men  of  tranlcen- 
4ent  holine/s3Lnd  mortification    ( in  the  fight  of  rnen)  Co  fecjucfired  from  the 
world  (fome  of  them}  and  the  vanities  of  it,  that  for  many  years  they  had  con- 
verfed  with  God  alone  in  a  manner  ^  yet  through  pride  and  conceit  of  their 
own  parts  and  bvour  with  God,fell  into  delufiom  and  temptations,,. if  not  alto- 
gether the  fame,  yet  not  lefs  ftrange  and  dreadful.  Such  examples  Ecclefiafiir 
cal  Story  will  afford,and  other  books  of  that  nature,  but  I  have  them  not  at 
this  time,  and  I  conceive  I  have  faid  enough  to  this  particular. 

But  of  his  ^rayiio  too,  fomewhat  would  be  obferved.  His  Spirits  tell  him 
romcwi?erc,thathehadthe  Gift  of  Graying.  Truly  I  believe  he  had,  a^it  is 
ordinarily  called  :  that  is,  that  he  could  expVefs  himlelfvery  fluently  and  ear- 
neftly  in  Prayer,andthat  he  did  it  often  to  his  own  great  contentment.  Lee 
no  man  wonder  at  this,-  I  havs,  riiuwcd  elsewhere  that  Ibme  that  have  been 
very  wicked,  yea,  fome  that  dyed  for  blafphcmy,  and  with  blalphemy  in 
their  mouth  to  the  laftgafp,  have  had  it  in  a  great  meafure,  and  done  m^uch 
miichief  by  it.  It  is  no  dilparagement  to  Prayer,  no  more  then  it  is  to  the 
beft  things  of  the  world  (and  what  better  and  more  heavenly  then  prayer  well 
u(ed  r )  it  cheybe  abuied.  Aid  it  is  commonly  ob(erved,that  the  corruption 
of  beft  things  is  moft  dang^>ous.  What  bred  thole  pernicious  hereticks 
that  folong  troubled  the  world,  and  could  notbefiippreftedbutby  abfoluce 
deftruction  ,  but  long  affected  prayers  ( therefore  called  £Ko';im  or  xVff/jQ/ww, 
that  IS  to  lay, the  ^^rayen)  and  Enthufiafms  ?  And  as  to  that  point  oi:  ml\?iird 
joy  and  compiacency  ,   which  fome  Schifmaticks  and  wicked  men  find  ia 

E  them- 


The  T\SF  AC  E. 


ihcmfclves  at  their  prayers,  which  ignorant  deluded  people  think  to  be  an 
argument  of  the  Spirit :  It  io  ^cxiaiii,and  is  a  myftcry  of  nature  that  hath(*may 
I  ipeak  it  without  bragging  )     been  brought    to  light   ( of  late  years  at 
leaft)  by  my  felf  and  fully  dilcovercd  ,  *That  not  only  the  inward  heat  of 
"  mental  conception  (where  there  is  any  vigor)  but  alio  the  mufick  of  ^ut- 
*'  ward  words,  is  able  to  occafion  ic.     Indeed  it  is  a  point  that  doth  deferve 
to  be  wellconfidcredof  in  thefe  times  efpecially.     For  when  young  boyes 
and  illiterate  men  (and  the  number  is  likely  toincreale  now  that  CattcUzing 
is  fo  much  negleded)  are  turned  loofe  toexercife  thcmfelvesin  this  gift  (as 
they  call  it)  and  when  by  long  practice  they  have  attained  to  fome  rcadinefs 
and  volubility jWhich  doth  occafion  fome  inward  lightfomenefs  and  excita- 
tions, or  perchance  lomcwhatthat  may  have  lomc  relemb lance  to  fpiritual 
Ibrrow  and  compunction,  they  prefently  think  themfelvesinfpiredj  and  lb 
they  become  Saiuuht^oxt  they  know  what  it  is  to  be  Qlnjliam.     And  if 
they  can  Pray  by  inspiration,  why  not  Preach  alfo  ?     So  comes  in  Ambaptifm 
by  degrees,  which  willbetheruine  of  all  Religion  and  civil  Government 
where  ever  it  prevails .  And  I  believe  that  this  fond  foolifh  conceit  of  Tnfpi- 
ration^  as  it  hath  been  the  occafiou  of  much  other  mifchief,  fo  of  that  horrid 
facriledge  ,  fl\all  I  call  it,   or  profanation   (  I  hope  I  may  do  either  with- 
out ofiPence,    for  it  is  not  done  by  any  pubhck   Authority  that   I  know 
of)  thecafting  andbanifhing  of  The  Lords  Prayer  out  of  manypri- 
rate  hou fes  and   Chuiches;  then  which,  I  think,  Chrift  never  received  a 
greater  alf:  ont  from  any  that  called  themlelves  Chriftians.  I  am  not  fb  uno'ia- 
ritable  as  to  believe  that  it  is  done  in  dire(5b  oppofition  to  Ghrift  by  any  re- 
al Chriftians,  but  in  a  furious  zeale  by  many,  I  believe,  againft  let  prayers. 
But  this  is  not  a  place  to  difputc  it :   Certainly ,  as  the  Lords  Prayer  is  a 
Prayer  of  moft  incredible  comfort. to  them  that  ufe  it  devoutly  and  upon 
good  grounds  (a  good  foundation  of  Religion  and  found  Faith,  I  mean)  fb 
I  believe  that  fct  Prayers  in  general  are  ot  more  concernment  to  the  fct- 
ling  of  Peace   in    the    Commonwealth  then  many   men  are  aware  of. 
But  let   this   pafs  for  my  opinion;    there  be  worie  I  am  lure  thAt  pals  • 
currently. 

Again,  A  man  may  wonder  (I  cannot  tell  whether  an  objedion  may 
be  made  of  it)  that  Dr.  Dec,  though  he  were  at  the  firft  deluded  f to  which 
his  own  pride  and  prefumption  did  expofe  him )  as  many  have  been  ; 
yet  afterwards  in  procefs  of  time  when  he  found  himfelf  fb  deluded  and 
fhufHed  with  j  when  Edward  i^elley  did  ufe  fiich  pregnant  arguments  to 
him  (as  he  did  hiore  then  once)  to  perfwade  him  that  they  were  evil  Spirits 
that  appeared  unto  them  ^  nay,when  he  had  found  by  certam  experience,  that 
his  Spirits  had  told  him  many  lies,  foretold  many  things  concerning  Princes 
and  Kingdoms ,  very  particularly  limited  with  circumftances  of  time , 
which  when  the  time  was  expired  did  not  at  all  come  to  pafs  j  yet  for  all 
this  he  durft  pmn  his  Soul  for  them  that  they  were  good  Spirits ,  and  con- 
tinued in  his  confidence  ( fb  farre  as  our  Relation  goes)  to  the  hi\.  I 
anfwer,  SwvL  io  the  power  of  this  kind  of  Spiritual  delufion,  it  doth  fo  pof- 
fcfs  them  whom  it  hath  once  taken  hold  of,  that  theyfeldoni,  anyofthem^ 
recover  themfelvcs.  In  the  dayes  o^  Mar  tin  Luther  (a  great  and  zealous  refor- 
mer- 


7 be    THE  FACE. 


mer  of  Religion  ,  but  one  chat  would  have  detcftcd  them  as  the  wdrft  of 
Infidels  that  had  u(ed  the  Lords  Trayer^  as  fbme  have  done  in  our  dayes,  as 
appcArsby  whatheiaith  of  it  in  more  then  one  place)  there  lived  one  Micha- 
el btifeiim,  who  applying  to  himfelf  fome  place  of  the  ^pocalypfe  ^  took  up- 
DQ.  him  to  Prophecy.  He  had  foretold  that  in  theyear  of  the  Lord  1555. 
before,  the  zgo't  September  the  end  of  the  world,  and  Chrifls  coming  to 
Judgment  wouU  be.  He  did  fliew  io  much  confidence,  that  fome  write, 
iMtJxt  himfelf  was  fomewhat  ftartled  at  the  firft.  But  that  day  pall,  he  came 
;^  fecond  time  to  Luther  with  new  Calculations,  and  had  digefted  the  whole 
bulincfs  into  zz.  Articles,  thecffe^of  which  was  to  demonftrate  chat  the 
end  of  the  world  would  be  in  OBokr  following.  But  now  LMf/;(fr  thoughc 
he  had  had  tryal  enouglp,  and  gave  fo  little  credit  to  him  ^  that  he 
(though  he  loved  the  manj  filenccd  hiiTwfor  a  time-,  whichour  Apocalyp- 
tical Prophet  took  very  ill  at  his  hands,  andwondred  much  at  his  incredu- 
lity* Weil,  that  moneth  and  lome  after  that  over,  our  Prophet  (  who  had 
made  no  little  ftir  in  the  Country  by  his  Prophecying)  was  caft  intoprilon 
for  hisobftinacy.  After  awhile /-«f/;ervifitcd  him,  thinking  by  that  time 
•to  find  him  ol  another  mind.  But  fo  yfar  was  he  from  acknowledging  his 
error,  that  he  down  right  railed  at  LMf/;er  for  giving  him  good  counlcl.  And 
Xome  write  that  to  his  dying  day  (having  lived  to  cheageof  80.  years)  he 
never  recanted.  And  was  not  this  the  cale  of  learned  rojtc/my,  who  fallen 
into  fome  grievous  wild  fancies  in  his  latter  daycs,  though  found  enough 
flill  in  other  things  ,  could  never  be  reclaimed  though  means  were  ufed 
from  time  to  time  the  beft  and  gentleft  (in  refpedto  his  worth  and  perfbn  ) 
that  could  be  thought  of?  But  what  talk  we  of  particular  men  ?  Con- 
fider  che  Anaha^tijh  in  s^cnev^}.  Above  an  hundred  years  ago  chey  croybled 
Germany  \  cry  much:  it  coft  many  thoulands  their  lives.  They  roved  up  and 
down.  No  looner  deftroyed  in  one  place  but  they  fprung  (whilefl:  that  lea- 
Ibn  laftcd)  in  another.  Their  pretences  every  where  were  the  fame  •  (?^«-. 
Velations  and  the  Spirit  :  the  wickednefs  ot  Princes  and  Magiftrates ,  and 
Chrijljijiis  to  he  jet  up  in  his  Throne.  Well,  at  la  ft  they  were  deftroyed  in  moft 
pl^es.  Stories  of  them  have  been  written  in  all  Languages,  read  every 
where,  and  their  lamentable  end.  Can  all  this  hinder  but  that  upon  every 
opportunity  ol  a  confuted  and  confounded  Government,  they  ftarc  up  a- 
gain  m  the  fame  Ihape  and  form  as  before ;  the  fame  pretences,  the  (ame  Scri- 
ptureSjfor  all  the  world,milerably  detorted  and  abuled,  to  raiie  tumults  and 
ledicions  in  all  places.  Such  is  the  wretchedncfs  of  man  that  is  once  out  oE 
the  right  way  of  Rcalon  and  Sobriety.  But  withall  we  rauft  (ay  in  this 
particular  cafe  of  Dr.  Vees^  though  his  obftinacy  was  great  and  marvellous, 
yet  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  great  was  i\iz  diUgefKe  and  fubtility  of  his 
Spirits  to  keep  their  hold  :  and  (ome  things  fometimes  happened  (  as  his 
danger  and  prefervation  about  Cra'vefend^  when  he  firft  ,  here  related,  went 
out  of  the  Realm)  very  {lrangcly,and  fuch  was  the  unhappinels  of  his  mif- 
applycd  zeal,  that  he  made  a  Providence  of  whatloever  hapned  unto  him 
asnedehred. 

So  much  for  Dr.  Dee  himfelf.     But  of  his  Spirits  a  greater  queflion  per- 
chance may  be  moved:    If  evil  wicked,  lyins  Spirits  (as  we  have  reafon 

E  %  "'^'^^  CO- 


The  TTS^SF  ACE. 


u 


to  believe  ,  and  no  man  I  think  will  queftion  )  how  Came  they  to  be  fuch 
perfwaders'to  Piety  and  godlinefs,  yea,  fuch  preachers  of  Chrift,  his  Incar- 
nation, his  Pafhon,  and  other  Myftenes  ot  the  Chriftian  Faith,  not  only 
by  them  here  acknowledged,  bat  in  fome  places  very  Scholaftically  fet  out 
and  declared'  ?  It  fcemeth  fomewhat  contrary  to  reafon  and  as  contrary  to 
the  words  of  our  Saviour,  Byery  Kingdom  divided  agatn/l  it /elf,  Scc^  But 
firfl:  to  the  matter  of  fad  :  The  Divels  we  know  even  in  the  Gofpel  did 
acknowledg,  nay,  in  tome  manner  proclaim  Chrift  to  be  the  Son  of  God  : 
which  is  the  main  Article  he  did  gonteft  with  Chrift  by  Scripture  Autho- 
rity- and  by  S.*P^M/i  teilimony,  can  transform  hi mfelf,  when  he  lift  into 
an  Anc^el  of  light.  And  in  fome  relations  well  atteftcd,  of  Pofleftions 
and  publickExorcifms  that  have  been  ufed;  wegnd  the  Divel  often  fpcak- 
ing  by  the  mouth  of  women,  vuha  like  a  Monk  out  of  the  Pulpit  ,  per- 
fwading  to  temperance,  rebuking  vices,  expounding  of  myfteries  ,  and  the 
like  then  as  one  that  were  an  enemy  to  truth  and  godlinels.  Infomuch 
that  fome  have  been  ready  to  make  a  great  myftery  and  triumph  of  it, 
thereby  to  convia  Hereticksand  Atheifts,  in  time,  more  effcdually  ,  then 
they  have  been  by  any  other  means  that  have  been  uled  hitheito  :  and  af- 
cribincT  the  whole  bufinefs  not  to  the  Divel  himielf,  but  the  great  power 
and  Providence  of  God^  as  forcing  himagainft  his  will  to  beaninftrumenc 
of  his  Truth.  For  my  part,  I  fee  cauie  enough  to  believe  that  fuch  things, 
the  re  contained  at  large,  might  come  from  the  Divel ;  that  is,  might  tru- 
ly and  really  be  fpoken  by  perfons  poflefied  and  infpired  by  the  Divel. 
But  that  they  are  impleyed  by  God  to  that  end,  I  fhall  not  eafily  grant. 
I  rather  fufped  that  whatioever  comes  from  them  in  that  kind,  though  it 
be  good  in  it  ielf,  yet  they  may  have  a  mifchievousend  in  it-  and  that  I 
believe  will  Toon  appear  if  they  can  once  gaincfomuch  credit  among  men 
as  CO  be  believed  to  be  lent  by  God  to  bear  teftimony  to  the  truth.  A  man 
.may  fee  fomewhat  already  by  thole  very  Relations ,  and  that  account  that  is 
given  us  there.  And  therefore  I  do  not  wonder  if  even  among  the  more 
Ibber  Piipifts  this  projeit  (as  the  relater  and  publiOier  complaineth;  hath 
found  oppofition.  The  Divel  is  very  cunning  ;  a  notable  Polititian.  5. 
^aul  knew  him  fo,  and  therefore  he  ufes  many  words  to  fet  out  his  frauds. 
Hecan  lay.  the  foundation  of  aplot,  if  need  be,  ahundred  years  before  the 
effeds  fliali  appear.  But  then  he  hath  his  end.  It  is  not  good  truftingof 
him,  or  dealing  with  him  upon  any  pretence.  Can  any  man  fpeak  bet- 
ter then  he  doth  by  the  mouth  of  Anabaptifts  and  Schifmaticks  ?  And  this 
hewiil  dofor  many  years  together  if  need  be,  that  they  that  at  firft  flood 
pff  may  be  won  by  time.  But  let  them  be  once  abiolute  maft^rs  ,  and 
then  he  will  appear  in  his  own  fhape.  There  is  one  thing  which  I  Won- 
der much  more  at  in  thofe  Relations  I  have  mentioned  ,  and  that  is,  that 
the  Divel  himfclf  fliould  turn  fuch  a  fierce  accufer:  of  chepi  that  haVe 
ferved  him  fo  long.  Witches  and  Magicians.  I  know  he  aoth^here  fo  too 
in  fome  kind  ,  in  more  then  one  place.  He  doth  iii'uch  inveigh  agiinft 
Divels  «nd  all  that  have  to  do  with  them  ,  Magicians,  Sec.  But  that  is 
in  general  only,  or  in  IQlley's  particular  cale ,  upon  whom  he  had  a- 
notha:  hold ,  which  he  made  more  reckoning  of  •,  to-'wit ,  as  he  ap- 
peared 


The   T^BFAC^' 


peared  to  them  as  an  Angel  of  light.  Any  thing  to  maintain  his  interefl. 
there,  and  their  good  opinion  of  him  ;  for  he  had  great  hopes  from  that 
plot.  But  that  he  fliould  purfue  fb  ridgedly  particular  men  and  women 
whom  he  had  ufed  fo  long,  to  death,  and  do  the  part  of  an  informer  a- 
gainfl:  them  ,  may  feem  more  like  unto  a  Kingdom  divided  againft  it  lelf, 
but  it  is  not  our  cafe  here  ;  neither  am  I  very  well  fatisfied  ,  that  whac- 
fbever  the  Divcl  faith  or  layesto  the  charge  of  them  by  whol^  mouth  he 
fpeaketk  ,  ought  to  be  received  for  good  teilimony.  Here  it  may  hcWierim 
had  fome  reafon  ,-  for  I  doubt  ibme  have  been  too  credulous.  But  this  by 
the  way  fliall  iuffice. 

That  the  Divel  fliould  lie  often,  orbe  miftakenhimfelf,  in  his  Troche- 
cieSj  as  by  many  particuiars  of  this  Relation  will  appear  ,  I  wall  not  look 
upon  that,  as  if  any  objediion could  be  mad^of  it.     But  it  may  be  won- 
dred ,    perchance ,   Dr.  Dee  being  often  in  lb  great  "^anc  of  monks  ,  that  he 
did  not  know  which  way  to  turn^    what  fhitt  to  make ;  at  which  time 
be  did  alwayes  with  much  humility  addrefs  hinafelf  to  his  Spirits,  making 
his  wants  known  unto  them  •  and  the  Divel  on  the  other  fide  ,  both  by 
his  ownboalbng,  and  by  the  teftimonieof  thole  whocould  not  lie,  having 
the  goods  of  this  world   (though  ftiU  under  God)   much  at  his  difpofing  , 
and  alwayes,  as  he  feemed,  very  delirous  to  give  Dr.  'Dee  all  polTible  fatis- 
fa^lion  ■    that  in  this  cale  ,  once  or  twice  perchance  excepted,  when  the 
Dr.  was  well  furniilied   (for  which  the  Spirits  had  his  thanks)  at  all  other 
times  he  was  flill ,  to  his  very  great  grief  and  perplexity ,  left  to  himfelf 
to  fhift  as  he  could,  and  fome  pretence,  why  not  otherwile  fupplyed,  cun- 
ningly deviled  by  them  that  were  lb  able,  and  to  whom  he  was  io  dear. 
But  I  miift  remember  my  felf ;    I  laid  fo  ablej  but  in  fome  places  his  Spi- 
rits tell  him  plainly.   It  was  not  in  their  power  ,  becaufe  no  part  of  their 
Commilsion,  or  becaule  it  did  not  belong  unto  them  (fuch  as  dealt  with 
him,)  to  meddle  with  the  Trcafurcs  of  the  earth  ;    and  (ometimes  that 
they  were  things  beneath  their  cognizance  or  intermedling.     Of  the  diffe- 
rent nature  of  Spirits,  we  fliall    lay  ibmcwhat  by  and  by^  that  'may  have 
>^mc  relation  to  this  alio,  perchance.     But  granting  that  the  Divel    gene- 
rally hath  power  enough  both  to  find  mony  and  to  gratific  with  it  where 
,he  feeth  caufe.     Yet  in  this  cale  of  Witches  and  Magicians,  dired:  or  in- 
dire^^t ,  it  w  ttfiMm  and  obfaved  by  many  as  an  argument  of  Gods  great  TroVidence 
oyer  men^  that  generally  he  hath  not :    It  is  in  very  deed  a  great  Argument  of  a 
fuperiour  over-ruling  power  and  Providence.     For  it  men  ot  all  ptofef- 
fions  will  hazard  (their  Souls)   fo  far  as  we  lee  daily  to  get  money  and 
cftates  by  indired:  unconfcionable  wayes ,   though  they  are  not  alwayes 
Hire  ,  andthat  it  be  long  oftentimes  before  itcomes,,  and  oftentimes  prove 
thpir  ruine^  even  in  this  world,  through  many  cafualties ;  as  alterations 
^.of  times,   and  the  like :    what  would  it  be  if  it  were  in  the  power  of  the 
.;P.  to  help  every  one  that  came  unto  him,   yielding  but  to  Inch  and  fuch 
r;;Condit!ons,  according  as  they  Cv^v^Ul  agree  i 

Hitherto  I  have  confidered  what  I  thought  might  be  objeded  by  others- 
I  have  one  obje^ion  tnore,  vvl.lca  to  me  was  more  conlidcrable  (as an  obje- 
ction, I  mean,  not  Co  readily  anfweredj  then  all  the  reft  :    Devils ,  we  think 

gene 


'The   'P\EFACB, 


generally,  boch  by  their  nature  as  Spirits,  and  by  the  advantage  of  loijg 
experience  Tavjery  great  advantage  indeed  in  point  of  knowledgj  cannot  but 
have  perfed  knowledg  of  all  natural  things,  and  all  fecrets  of  Nature,  which 
do  not  require  an  infinite  underftanding;   which  by  that  meafureofknoWc-r> 
ledge  that  even  men  have  attained  unto  in  a  little  time,  is  not  likely  to  bf 
foneceflary  in  moft  things.     But  left  any  man  fhould  quarrel  at  the  word 
^erfeB     becaufe  all  perfedion  belongs  unto  God  properly,  it  fhall  fuificq^ 
t«  fay,  That  the  knowledge  Divels  have  of  things  Natural  and  Humane- 
is  incomparably  greater  then  man  iscapableof.    If  fo,  how  comes  it  tc>^ 
pafs  that  in  many  places  of  this  Relation  we  find  him  ading  his  part  rathe,^ 
as  a  Sophifter  ( that  I  fay  npt  a  Juggler)  then  aperfed  Philofopher,-  as -a 
Quack,  or  anEmpirick  lometiimes,  then  a  True,  genuine  Naturahft.  And 
for  language  (nottofpeak  oi  his  Divinity,  which  he  might  difguiie  of  pui-. 
pofc  to  his  own  ends)  rather  as  one  that  had  learned  Latin  by  reading  of  bai;-:' 
barous  books,  of  the  middle  age,  for  the  moft  part,  then  of  one  chat  had  beer^^ 
oi  Augufiui  his^  time,  and  Iq^ng  before  that.  But  that  which  is  ftrangeft  of  all 
is,  that  as  in  one  place  the  Spirits  were  difcovered  by  Ed.  IQlley  to  fteal  out  of. 
Jqrippa  or  rnr/^ew«M4  (fo  he  thought  at  leaftj  fo  in  divers  other  places,  by  thf;  ' 
phrafe,  and  by  the  doctrine  and  opinions  a  man  may  trace  noted  Chymicat 
and  Cabahftical  Authors  of  later  times  j  yea,  (if  Ibe  not  muchmiftaken) 
and  fardceljus  him(elf,that  prodigious  creature,  for  whom  and  againft  whom 
fo  much  hath  been  written  fince  he  livedj  thefe  things  may  lecmftrange, but 
I  think  they  may  be  anfwered.  Forfirft,  we  lay,  ThcDivdis  notambicious 
to  fhew  himfelf  and  his  abilirie?  before  men,  but  his  way  is  (fo  obferved  by 
many)    tofithimfelf  (for  matter  and  words)  to  the  genius  and  capacity  of 
thofe  that  he  dcalech  with.  Dr.D^?,  of  himfelf,  long  before  "any  Apparition, 
was  a  Cabali  ftical  man  ,    up  to  the  ears, .  as  I  may  lay  5  .as  may  appear  to  any 
man  by  his  i\fo/Wi  Hmogly^hka^  a  book  much  valued  by  himfelf,  and  by  him 
Dedicated  at  thefirft  to  Maxmilwit]it  Emperor,  and  iince  prefented  (as  here 
related  by  himlelf)to  (]{odolphe  as  a  choice  piece.  It  may  be  thought  fo  by  thofe 
who  efteem  luch  books  as  Dr.  FW,  Dr.  Jlabafier,  and  of  late  Gafarell^  and  the 
liRe.  For  my  part  I  have  read  him  5  itisfoon  don,  itisbutahttlebook  :  but 
I  muft  profefs  that  I  can  extrad  no  fcnfe  nor  reafon  (found  and  folid)  out  of 
it:   neither  yet  doth  it  feemto  me  very  dark  or  myftical.     Sure  we  are  that 
thofe  Spirits  did  a6l  their  parts  fo  well  with  Dr.Dcf,  that  for  the  moft  part(in 
moft  At^ions)  they  came  off  with  good  credit;  and  we  find  the  Dr.  every 
where  almoft  extolling  his  Spiritual  teachers  and  inftruders,  and  prayfing 
God  for  them.  Little  reafon  therefore  have  we  to  except  againft  any  thing(in 
this  kind)  that  gave  him  content,  which  was  their  aim  and  bufinel^s. 

Secondly  ^l^zy^  If  any  thing  relifh  here  oiTrithenmsoifaracdfusfix:iny^nc\\^ 
well  may  we  concludc*from  thence,  that  the  Divel  is  like  himfelf.  This  is  the 
jrucft  inference.  It  is  he  that  infpired  Tritbemius  and  Taracelfus^Scc.  that  (peak- 
cth  here;  and  wonder  yc  if  he  fpeaks  like  them  ?  I  do  not  exped  that  all 
men  will  be  of  my  opinion;  yet  I  fpeak  no 'Paradoxes :  I  have  both  reafon 
and  authority  good  and  plaufible,  I  chink,  for  what  I  lay  ;  but  to  argue  the 
cafe  at  large  would  be  tedious.  Of  Irithmm  fomewhac  more  atterwards  will 
be  faid.  But  we  rauft  go  far  beyond  that  time.    A  thoufand  years  and  above, 

before 


The   9'I{8F  A  QS. 


beForeeitherof  them  was  born,  was  che  BookOf  Enoch  wellknowniri 
the  world  ;  and  rhen  al(o  was  Lmgm  Mami{u^on  which  twomoft  of  the 
Cabala  (lands)  much  talked  or,a$  appears  hy  Greg.lSitffm  his  learned  books  a- 
gainfl:  Eunomius  the  Fhrerick.  To  Ipcak  more  particularly  (becaufe  Co  much  ot 
it  in  this  RelacionUhe  BookOf  Enoch  was  written  before  Chrift-  and  ic 
isthoughtbyfome  very  learned  (though  dcnyed  by  others)  that  it  is  tlievciy 
book  that  S.JWe  intended.  A  great  fragment  of  it  in  Greekfit  was  written  in 
Hebrew  firft)  is  to  be  feen  in  Scali^er,  (that  incomparable  man,  the  wonder  of 
his  Age,  if  not  rather  of  all  Ages)  his  learned  Notes  upon  Eufebius .  it  waS  Co  fa- 
mous a  book  anciently  that  even  Heathens  took  notice  of  it,  and  grounded 
uponitobjcdionsagainftChriftians.  It  may  appear  by  Onge?i  againftCV//Hx 

in  his  book  5./?.  275-  n^fv  J'i  .ruyKixvfxmf  (faith  he)  irlnTifi  'JS,  iMHrorar  xe?*  af6j«-!Tov« 
•T^Afur  i^i]iiftiTi9n9-i%'  d9fctvdro<  JAflsiTH  itf  ivriv  ,  diri  ISv  \f  ']a  ^Tti-)r  yiy^AiXfjiyay  artva.  Ivf  ivrif 
(^atviTui  arayvovi  ,  IvSi  yva^irof^oTi  iy  'Jaif  EKKMfiaii;  ou  Taci/ f  4psT<t/  a(  S^la.  7«  Wiyiyfen/.iJLii»11  Ecav 

fi,^Ki*.  But  S.  Jerome  zn^  S.  Mguflin  fpeak  of  it  more  peremptorily  as  a  fabulous 
book,  and  not  allowed  by  the  Church.  How  much  of  it  is  extant ,  befides 
what  we  have  in  Scdiger^  I  know  not  5  nor  what  part  ic  is  Co  often  mentioned 
in  this  Relation.  By  what  I  have  feen  it  doth  appear  to  me  a  very  fuperfliti- 
ous,foolifli,  fabulous  writing;  or  to  conclude  all  in  one  word,  Cabaliflical, 
fuch  as  the  Divel  might  own  very  well,  and  in  all  probability  was  ftie  author 
olF.  As  for  that  conceit  of  the  tongue  which  was  fpokeri  by  Muryi  in  Para' 
difc,wc  have  already  laid  that  it  is  no  late  invention  j  and  I  make  noquefli- 
on  but  it  proceeded  from  the  fame  Author.  Yea,  thofc  vety  Chara6ters  com- 
mended untoDr.D^-e  by  \i\s  Spirits  for  holyandmyflical,  and  the  original 
Charaders  (as  I  take  it)  of  the  holy  tongue,  iLjy  ^le  no  other  ,for  the  moft  pare 
but  fuch  as  were  fet  put  and  publiflied  long  agoe  by  one  Thefeiis  Jmbrofits  cue 
of  Magical  books,ashimrelf  profcfTeth  :  you  (hall  have  a  view  of  them  in 
■fome  of  the  Tables  at  the  c»dof  the  Preface.  Some  letters  are  the  fame,  others  have 
much  rcfemblace  in  the  fubflance ;  and  in  tranfcribing  it  is  likely  they  might 
differ  fome  alteration. But  it  may  be  too  the  Spirits  did  not  intend  they  fhould 
be  taken  for  the  fame,  becaufe  exploded  by  learned  men,  and  therefore  altered 
tht  forms  and  figures  of  moft  of  them  of  purpofe  that  they  might  fcem  new, 
and  take  the  better.  So  that  in  all  this  the  Divel  is  but  ftill  conftant  unto  him- 
felf,and  this  conftancy  ftands  him  in  good  ftead,toadd  the  more  weight  and 
to  gain  credit  to  his  Impoftures.  Not  to  be  wondred  therefore  if  the  fame 
things  be  found  elfewhere  ,  where  the  D.  hath  an  hand. 

With  Cabaliftical  writings  we  may  joyn  Chymical^  here  alfo  mentioned  m 
many  places.  I  have  nothing  to  fay  to  Gj;«//?rif  as  ic  is  meerly  natural  ,  and 
keeps  It  felf  within  the  compafs  of  fobriecy.It  may  wel  go  forapartofPhylick, 
for  ought  I  know,  though  many  great  Phyficians,  becaufe  of  the  abule  and 
danger  of  it,  as  I  conceive,  have  done  their  beft  (formerly)  to  cry  it  down.  I 
my  lelf  have  feen  ftrange  things  done  by  it:  and  it  cannot  be  denycd  but  the 
wonders  of  God  and  Nature  are  as  eminently  vifiblc  in  the  experiments  of 
that  Arc  as  any  other  natural  thing.  Tlumver^itisnot  improbable  that  diyers  fecrets 
^bf  it  came  to  the  knowledg  of  man  by  the  %eyelation  of  Spirits.  And  the  pra(5tice  and 
profeffion  of  ic  in  moft  (them  efpecially  that  profefs  nothing  elle)  is  accom- 
panied with  fo  much  Superftition  and  Impofture,  as  iti  would  make  a  lober 
man^thattendrechthcprefervation  of  himfelf  in  his  right  wits,  to  be  afraid  01 

ic* 


The   T  %E  FACE. 


h.  Of  the  IriViJmutattono^  Metals  J  what  may  be  done  by  Art  I  will  not  take 
upon  me  to  determine  :  lam  apt  enough  to  believ5that  fome  ftrange  thmgs 
(inthatkmd)maybec3one,ifa  man  will  gotothecoftofit,  and  undergoeche 
trouble  upon  lo  much  uncertainty  of  the  event.  buL  ilidrrwhich  w,c  call  ordi- 
narily ,and  moft  underltand  by  it/Che  fhylofopheys  Stone^is  certainly  a  meer  cheat, 
the  iiril:  author  <ind  inventor  whereof  was  no  other  then  the  Divel. '  Legi  ttf 
am  Spirituumfiipemonon  rCVelatiofie  traditam  anti^uitm  at  Urn  faciendi  Auri^is-  nie  dta- 
uUtm  uju  eyefiijje^&cc.  faith  one  {Jo.Franc.fkus  Mirandula)  of  the  Jearnedif  Ah- 
th'ors  that  I  have  feen  of  that  fubjedt,  in  defence  of  it, I  meant.   If  1^  mean  Sa- 
perHosSpirkus^  luch  as  appear  in  form  of  Angels  of  Light,luch  as  deluded  Dr. 
X)e(?,  and  daily  doththoie  that  hunt  after  (?(eVe/df/o?n,  and  Prophecies,  and  un- 
lawful Curiofities,  I  grant  it.DuLthdLany  good  Angels  did  ever  meddle  in  a 
prA<5tice  commonly  attended  with  fo  much  import ure,  impiety,  coufenagc  as 
this  commonly  is,  I  Ihallnoteafily  graflt.    Though  1  mult  add,  I  make  great 
difference  (if  we  willipeak  properly;  between  Ars  faciendi  aun  (a  thing  I  do 
not  deny  to  be  feafible  by  natural  means^and  that  we  call  the  fhylo/opbers  Stone^ 
as  bciore  already  ii'itimated.    And  for  that  objection  of  his,  why  evil  Spirits 
flioiild  not  bethe  Authors  or  revealers  of  it  unto  any  (though  otherwife  for 
.fome  otiler  reafons  he  thinks  it  probable)  becauie  it  is  not  likely  that  God 
iwpuldfufFerf/;«M  to  give  fuch  power  unto  men  like  themlelves,  whom  only 
among  men  they  favour  and  refped:,  that  is,  wicked  ungodly  men.    Firft,  ( 
anfwer^That  is  a  vgry  weak  objc(5tion,rince  we  know  by  conftant  experience 
of  prefcnt  and  future  Ages,   thatthey  arenotof  the  beltof  men  commonly 
tlut  are  the  greatelf  and  richeft.  But  Secondly,  There  is  no  great  caufc  to  fear 
that  any  thing  hitherto  revealed  (or  hereafter  to  be  revealed,  I  believcj  of  this 
iecret,  Ihould  enable  men  (goodorbadj  to  do  much  hurt  in  the  world. The 
.crreateifhurt  is  to  themlelves  who  are  deluded (yea,and  beggerdmany  firfton 
laft)  and  to  fome  few  not  very  wile  whom  they  coufen  as  themlelves  have 
been  coufened    And  for  this  that  they  can  do  riomore,  we  are  beholding 
not  to  the  Divel  who  certainly  would  not  be  wanting  to  himfclf  or  to  any 
opportunity  to  do  mifchief  byhimlelf  or  his  Agents,  but  to  God  who  doth 
not  give  him  the  power:   So  much  to  Mrdw^w/^  ,  out  of  my  refpetfJ:  to  his 
name,  and  tor  the  better  fati  5  fadion  to  the  Reader.  I  owe  the  fight  and  u(e 
of  the  book  to  m.y  Learned  friend  Dr.Windett  before  mentioned — .  I  am  much 
confirmed  in  that  opinion  (of  the  Divel  being  the  Author)  by  what  I  find  of 
it  in  the  bock  which  hath  given  me  this  occafion  to  Ipeak  of  it.  Were  there 
nutui.ig,  vlic  but  the  gr jIs  and  .impudent  forgeries  that  have  been  ufed  to  com- 
mend it  unto  men,  fome  entituling  the  invention  to  yfdam  himfelf,  others  to 
So/owo;/,and  the  like  j  and  the  many  books  that  have  been  counterfeited  to  the 
fame  end^and  again  the  moft  ridiculous  and  profane  applying  &  expounding 
of  Scriptures,a  thing  ufually  done  by  moft  that  are  abettors  of  it,thofe  things 
■  were  enough  to  make  a  man  to  abhor  it.  Sure  enough  it  is,that  not  oply  Dr. 
Z^t'e,  but  others  alio  who  had  part  of  that  precious  Tot^der  brought  unto  them  by 
Spirits^  and  expeded  great  matters  of  it,  were  all  cheated  and  gulfd  (and  I  be- 
lieve it  coft  fome  of  them  a  good  deal  of  money  ;  Ttince  T{oj'emberg  particular- 
ly) by  thole  Spiritual  Chymifts.   Let  them  confider  of  it  that  have  been  deal- 
ing in  luch  things  as  they  fljall  lee  caiife. 


The  Trefnce, 


So  ilill  wc  fee,  that  in  all  thefe  things,  a'=  we  faid  before,  the  Divel  is  not  be- 
holding to  others,  (as  might  be(ufpc6tcd)  but  others  ha\c  been  beholding  to 
him:  As  for  his  Divinity,  i  nhighcft  pomes,  if  he  fpakc  the  truth,  it  was  for 
his  own  ends,  as  we  faid  before  :  He  can  do  it,  who  makes  any  quellion  ? 
In  contro\  crted  points,  wc  may  obferve,  chat  he  doth  fer've  thefcene  aod  prefcnc 
occafion  i  and  I  make  no  queil;on,but  had  Dr.  Dee^onc  to  Conjiantinople iZnd 
been  entertained  there  with  refpcd:,  his  Spirits  there  would  ha\  c  fliewed  them- 
felves  as  good  Mahometans^  as  clfewhere  good  Roman  Catholicks^  or  Troteftants. 

We  have  fomewhere  a  very  pretty  Tale,  (I  would  fay  a  curious  Obfervation 
if  I  thought  it  true)  concemingthenature  of  the  Serpen  tor  Addar,  handfomly 
cxpreflcdj  how  flie  tra'neth  her  yong  ones  to  fct  them  out  abroad  into  the  world 
that  they  may  (hift  for  themfelv  es.  Twenty  days,  as  I  remember,  are  foent  in 
that  work:  Now  whether  it  be  {^o  really^,  I  cannot  fay  certainly,  but  I  fufped: 
it.  It  is  not  in  Ariflotle^  and  I  looked  in  Aldroi/andffs^  and  I  could  not  findc 
it:  But  whctheritbcfo  or  no,  let  no  body  wonder;  forthis  was  the  maner  of 
Preaching  formerly  (and  may  be  yet  perchance  in  fome  places)  amiOng  Monki 
and  Fryars  in  great  requeft.  They  would  make  a  ftory  of  Man,  or  Bcafts,  as 
they  thought  fit  themiclves,  and  their  Fancies  belt  ferved ;  pretty  and  witty,  as 
much  as  they  could  j  whether  it  had  any  ground  of  truth,  or  no,  no  man  re- 
quired ;  Thc.moralization  was  good.  If  the  Divel  have  done  fo  here  it  was 
not  through  ignorance  (for  he  is  too  good  a  Naturalift;  and  I  believe  there  is 
fomewhat  even  in  Nature,  though  we  know  it  not,  why  both  in  facred  and  pro- 
phanc  H:ftory,  Spiritsand  Serpents  are  (b  often  joy  ncd)  of  which  is  true  and 
real;  buias  hath  been  faid,  it  Icrvcd  his  turn,  and  that  is  enough.  And  al- 
though, having  confidcred  it  as  an  Objcdlion,  how  the  Divel  comethto  fpeak 
fomuch  truth,  as  will  be  found  in  this  Book;  no  man,  I  think,  will  expcd  I 
ftiould  give  an  account  of  any  falfc  Doctrine  or  Divinity,  that  ic  rqay 
contain:  Yet  one  point  I  think  fit  to  take  notice  of,  and  proteft  againft  it ;  as 
falfe,  erronious,  and  of  dangerous  confcqucnce ,  and  that  is,  where  ic  is 
faid,  That  4  wd«  (in  fome  cafes)  may  kill  another  man  (Vrinceor  other")  without 
apparent  canfe,  or  lawful  Authority,  and  therefore  pnnifhable  by  the  Laws  of 
Man  5  who  ne^erthelefs^  may  expeB  a  great  reward  at  the  hands  of  God  for  his 
aB :  H  J  w  this  may  agree  with  the  Principles  of  New  Lights,  and  Anabaptifti- 
cal  Divinity,  I  know  not;  it  is  very  contrary  to  the  Principles  of  that  Ortho- 
dox Divinity,   lately  profcfTcd  and  cftabhfhed  by  Law  in  £«g/^ff^/. 

I  have^now  faid  in  this  main  Objediion,  (as  I  apprehended  it)  what  I  think 
was  molt  proper  and  pertincnt,and  I  hope  may  fatiffie.  But  I  have  fbmewhat  clfe 
to  Dy,  which  in  this  cafe  of  Di'vels  and  Spirits  in  general,  I  think  it  \ery  confi- 
derable,  and  may  fatisfie  perchance,  in  (omc  cafts,  where  nothing  elfe  can. 
We  talk  of  Spirits,  and  read  of  Spirits  often,  but  I  think  it  is  \ery  litde 
that  we  know  (thebeft  ofusall)  of  them,  of  their  nature  or  dififercnces :  And 
how  then  can  it  be  expeded  that  we  Aiould  refolve  all  doubts  ?  And  though  I 
think  it  is  not  much  that  any  man  ever  knew  and  rightly  apprehended,  or  can, 
as  he  is  a  man,  in  this  bufinefs ;  yet  my  opinion  is,  (though  I  know  it  is  much 
gainfaidand  oppofed)  that  ancient  Tlatonick  Phylofophcrs  of  the  latter 
times,  underftood  much  more  then  moft  ChriRians;  I  do  not  write  this, 
as  though  I  thought,  or  would  have  any  thought  by  others  to  be  the  worfc 
ehrillians  for  being  ignorant  in  thefe  things ;  but  rather,  in  my  opinion,  any 

F  maw 


7  he  Treface, 


man  thcbettcr  Chrlftian,by  much,  who  dgth  not  regard  it  or  dcfire  ic :  For  my 
part,  although  I  mail  acknowledge  that  fomc  fcriiples  of  my  minde,did  induce 
mcto  lock  into  many  Book  ,,  unc  1 1  wasfatisficd,  which  otherwifel  liad  never 
done  i  yet  I  profcf^  to  believc,ihat  it  ib  (o  little  that  can  be  known  by  man  jn  this 
fubiedt,  andfubiedt  to  fo  muchillufion,  as  that  I  think  no  Rudy  ismore\ain 
and  foolifti  i  and  that  I  would  noBgo  three  i\cp^  out  of  my  doors  (more  then 
what  Ididtofatisfie  myminde  in  fomc  matters  of  Faith,  if  anyluch  fcruplc 
didari(e)  roknowasmuchasthcprofoundcilPlatonick.  or  Phylofopher  yea, 
or  Magician  oF  them  all  ever  knew.  Certainly  hcis  buta  weakChrilliaii,  when 
fo  many  high  Myftcries  are  propofed  unto  us  in  ChriTi:  by  his  Gofpel,  and  of  io 
much  conlcqucncc,  that  cannot  beilow  his  time  better:   They  that ha\ cany 
hopes,  through  Faith  in  Chrift,  and  a  godly  life,  to  be  admitted  one  day  into 
the  prcfenccof  God,  and  to  fee  face  to  face,  asGodliath  promircd  ;    will  they 
hazard  fo  o-forious  a  hope,  by  prving  through  unfcafonable,  unprofitable  curiofi- 
ty,  into  the  nature  of  thcfc  vaff d  Spirits,  which  God  hath  forbidden  :    But  be- 
caule  it  doth  concern  Relig'on  in  general,  that  we  bdicc  Spirits ;  and  when 
Objedtions  arc  made  that  cannot  be  anfwered,  m.any  arefcandaiized,and  Athc- 
ifts  ready  to  take  the  ad\  antage  of  it ;  I  fay,  that  it  ftjould  be  no  wonder  to  any, 
fober  and  rational,  if  we  cannot  refolve  all  doubts,  fince  it  is  fo  httle  that  we 
know  orcatiknow^  beyond  the  bare  o'-r'  in  this  matter:  MoiliChriftians  are 
bred  in  and  to  this  opinion,  that  all  Spirits,  (fo  commonly  called)  are  cither  An- 
<Tels  of  Heaven;  or  Di^  els  of  Hell:     I  know  no  Scripture  for  if,  or  dctennina- 
fion  of  any  general  Councel,  that  I  remember,  at  this  time  at  Icaft,  and  fo  long 
I  do  notthink  my  felf  bound  againft  apparent  realon ;  For  the  conceit  of  all  eml 
Spirits  or  Di'vels  being  in'HeU,  I  think  learned  Mr,  Meade  hath  tak^nthattQ 
task^  infome  of  hin  Worfy,  and  fnfficiently  confuted  it :    The  very^  word  Spirit, 
is  4  term  of  great  Ambiguity ;   We  undcrlfand  by  it,  commonly,  fubftances,' 
that  arc  akoc^ether  immaterial.     Many  of  the  ancient  Fathers,  it  is  well  known, 
did  not  allow  of  any  fuch  at  all,  befidcs  God  :   But  we  think  that  to  have  no  vi- 
fible  Body,  and  to  be  purely  immaterial,  is  all  one  ;.  God  knows  how  many 
deforces  there  maybe  between  thcfc  but  we  cannot  know  it;  neither  doth  ic 
concern  our  falvation,  for  which  we  have  reafon  to  praife  God:   But  if  ic 
were  fo,  that  all  Sj?/r/>j"  are  either  Divels  or  Angels,,  what  Qiall  we  make  of 
thcfc  that  are  found  in  mines,  of  which  learned  As^ricola  hath  written  ;    of 
ihofe  that  have  been  time  out  of  mindc  called  ^u'/S^Ao/,  (from  whence  pro- 
bably, as  wc  have  faid  clfewhcre,  Gobelin  in  Englifti  is  derived)  who  live  in 
private  Houfes,  about  old  Walls,  and  Ifaiks  of  Wood,  harmlefiotherwifc,  bun 
very  thievifli,  fo  frequent  and  fo  known  m  fuiuc  Countrcys,  that  a  man  may  as 
well  doubt  whether  there  be  any  Horfes  in  Unglandy  becaufc  there  are  none 
in  fomc  parts  of  the  World ;  not  found  in  all  America,  I  think,  till  fomc  were 
carried  thither  :  Neither  can  I  believe,  that  thole  Spirits  that  pleafe  themfelves 
in  nothing  clfc  but  harmlefs  (ports  and  wantonncfTe,  fuch  as  have  been  known 
in  all  Ages  5  fuch  as  did  ufe  to  (have  the  hairs  of  Flinim  Secimdm  his  Ser- 
vants in  the  Night,  ashimfelf  relates  (a  very  creditable  man,  I  am  fure)  in  his 
Epiltles,  and  the  like;  that  fuch  Spirits,  I  fay,  have  any  relation  either  to 
Heaven  or  to  Hell :  We  might  infifl:  in  more  particulars-,  but  wc  do  not  dcfirc 
to  dwell  upon  it  at  this  time  j  and  there  is  yet  fomewhat  clfe  to  be  (aid :   And 

what 


t . 


l^he  Treface, 


what  I  have  faid  of  fome  Platonicks,  I  did  not  intcud  thereby  to  juftificall 
their abfurd  or  fuperftitious  Opinions  in  this  Argument  of  Spirits:  As  they 
have  fcarchcd  farther  into  it  then  others  (befides  damnable  experience,  havino- 
confouiided  Magickwith  Phylofophy,  yea  ahr.oft  turned  all  Phylofophy  in-^ 
toMagick)  fo  it  was  confequent,  they  would  fall  into  moreHrrors  and  Ab- 
furditiesi  yet  withal,  they  have  found  fomcwhac  that  doth  better  agree  with 
daily  experience,  .then  what  is  comrtionly  known  or  believed.  Stnefms  w^s 
a  Bi&op,  but  as  he  doth  appear  to  us  in  his  Writings^,  a  better  Platonick  then 
a  Chriftian :  In  a  place  (in  his  Treatifc  De  infotnniis)  he  fheweth  how  evil  Spi- 
rits come  to  inhabit  men,  and  to  pofTefle  their  Brains:  H  s  terms  are  very 
courfe,  and  apparantly  ridiculous  j  but  there  ir.ay  be  fome  truth  in  the  Opini- 
on :  For  if  there  were  not  a  'very  near  and  intimate  conjunBion^  it  ratre  to  he 
vpondercd  hon>  the  Di'vel  comes  to  h^ow  the  'very  thoughts  of  Witches  and  Ma- 
gicians ^  as  ii  found  by  experience^  a'verred  by  more  then  one  :  And  in  thk  've- 
ry  Booh^  if  I  be  not  mi^aken^  fomervhat.may  be  obfer'ved  to  that  pnrpofe  :  It 
is  pojpble  there  may  be  more  kindes  of  pofffjion  then  one^  and  that  fome  men^ 
that  ne'ver  were  fftjpe^edy  have  had  a  jpirit  (beftdes  their  own) '  reftdent  jn 
them  J  ally  or  moU  part  of  their  li'ves^ 

,  I  have  done,  with  what  I  could  think  of,  vpon  which  objection  can  be 
made :  The  next  thing  is,  to  make  the  way  clearer  to  the  Reader,  by  fonie  con- 
fideration  of  the  method  of  the  Books.,  and  explanation  of  fome  terms  and 
phrafcs  there  ufed,  at  which  perchance  Tome  may  ftickat  the  firfl: :  At  the  very 
beginning  a  man  may  be  to  feck,  it  the  Title  of  ir.  Liber  fexti  myfterioruntj  ^ 
fanBi  paraUelus^  no'valifque.  1583.  both  as  it  relates  to  that  which  follow,  and 
as  It  reHedts  upon  fomewhat  before,  by  which  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  boc  k 
begins  hercabruptly  andimperfedly :  of  this  I  am  new  ready  togive  an  account 
to  the  Reader,  and  it  is  yery  fit  it  fkoiild  be  done. 

•  Firft  concerning  Titles,  fuchas  will  be  found  here  many  more  befidcs  thH 
the  whole  book,  or  relation  being  fubdividcd  into  many  parts  3  in  general   I 
fiy,  thataccordingtotJicDodiors  genius  (we  havcfaid  before  He  was  veryCrf- 
baliftical,  that  iSj  full  of  whimfies  and  crotchets,  under  the  notioiiof  iMy  derics, 
a  thing  that  fome  very  able,  otherwife,  have  been  fubjcct  unco)  and  the  h'gh 
opinion  he  had  of  thcfc  a(5ttons  and  apparitions  j  they  are  moftly  very  conceal- 
ed, and  (to  fpeak  the  truth)  phanraftick,  which  muft  make  them  the  Obfcu- 
rer:   I  could  give  the  Reader  a  view  of  them  all  here  put  together,  but  it 
would  be  (uperfluous:  There  be  (omc  fourteen  or  fifteen  Divifions  in  all  now 
remaining,  and  Co  many  Titles : '  There  is  a  Table  at  the  beginning,  that  doth 
refer  to  the  beginning  of  every  divifion,  where  the  Title  alfo  will  be  found: 
But  at  the  end  of  the  viii.  DmCion,  I  finde  thefe  words,  SeqnitHr  liber  24.  qtn 
hac  die  etiam  inceptus  efly  a  meridie :    horam  circiter  tertiam,  per  ipfitm  La- 
*vanael:  But  I  finde  nothing 'ollowing,  (biit  fome  vacant  (beets,  tiilwc  come 
to  the  ix.  Divifion,  Myjieri&rnm pragenfnm,  d^c.    And  the  laft  Di'  ifion  hath 
onelyifome  tables,  and  before  them,  fome  five  or  fix  pages  of  unknown  my- 
flical  words,  which  we  know  not  what  to  make  of ;  but  of  that  more  aftefr 
wartfs:  The  main  bufinefs  tobercfolvedhere(asItakeit^  is  what  it  is  that  we 
have,  and  what  wc  have  not,  fo  far  as  caii  be  gathered  by  what  reraaineth  5 
we  (hall  fee  what  wccan  fay  to  it»  In  they  ear  of  the  Lord,  One  thoufand  five 

hundred 


^he  Treface. 


hundred  eighty  four,  September  the  third,  (being  a  Monday)  Dr.  Pee  fir  it  ap- 
peared (being  prcfentcd  by  Honorable  perlons,  and  cf>pedcd)  before  the  Em- 
peror Rodolph.  Among  other  things  he  then  told  him,  that  for  thefe  two 
years  and  a  half,  Cods  holy  Angels  had  ttfedto  inform  him :  Our  Book^  or  firft 
Adtionhere,  bcginncth  2  8M^j,  1583.  According  to  this  reckoning,  it  muft 
be,  that  above  a  year  and  three  Moneths  before,  began  the  firft  Apparition; 
The  account  then  of  fifteen  Moneths  from  the  firft  Apparition,  we  want :  How 
much  (in  bulk^  that  might  come  to,  I  cannot  tell ;  neither  will  I  warrant  all 
perfcdtfrom  this  i8  of  M<y,  1583  to  the  fourth  of  April  1587.  though  for 
thcmofl  part  the  coherence  is  right  enough  to  that  time  :  But  from  thence  to 
the  twentieth  of  March,  i^°7*  is  a  vafl  chafma  or  hiatn^^  of  no  lefs  then  twenty 
years;  How  this  hath  happened,  I  cannot  tell  certainly  j  what  I  gucfs,  is  this, 
(bme  years  after  Dr.  Dff  J- death  (  )   SiiKohert  Cotton  hon^i\iis 

Library  (what  then  remained  of  it)  with  his  Magical  Table,  (of  which  after- 
wards) and  the  Ori^z«^/  Manufcripty  written  With  his  own  hand,  whereof 
this  is  a  Copy :  The  Book  had  been  buried  in  the  Earth,  how  long,  years  or 
moneths,  I  know  nor  5  but  fo  lorg,  though  it  was  carefully^  kept  fince,  yet 
it  retained  fo  much  of  the  Earth,  that  it  began  to  moulder  and  perifti  fome 
years  ago,  which  when  Sir  Thomas  C.  (before  mentioned)  obferved,  he  was 
at  the  charges  to  have  it  written  out,  before  it  (houldbe  too  late :  Now  full  fif- 
ty yearsj  or  not  many  wanting,  being  paflcd  fince  this  Original  came  to  Sic 
Robert,  it  is  very  likely,  that  had  any  more  in  all  that  time  been  heard  of,  Sir 
Robert^  or  Sir  Thomas,  his  Son  and  Heir,  would  have  heard  of  it,  and  got 
it  as  foon  as  any  body  clfe :  And  becaufe  no  m.ore  hath  been  heard  of  all  this 
while,  it  is  more  then  probable  that  no  more  is  extant,  not  in  England,  nor  I 
think  any  where  clfe:  Happily  the  reft  might  pcriflb,  fome  part,  (it  not  all) 
cvcnwhileft  the  Doctor  lived  j  and  we  (hall  finde  in  this  Relation,  That  a 
good  part  of  his  holy  Book^s  nvere  burnedy  but  (which  is  more  firange)  a  great 
fart  of  them,  by  the  help  of  Spirits,  reco'vered  and  reftored:  Or  it  may  bcj, 
that  fince  his  death,  the  reft  Cthe  place  where  they  lay  being  unknown)  might 
rot  in  the  earth ;  now  if^  as  probably  no  more  be  extanfj  we  may  account  this 
that  we  have  here,  in  that  refped:  perfe(ft,  becaufe  here  is  all  that  can  be  had. 
But  if  any,  (as  it  is  the  nature  of  many,  if  not  moft,  rather  to  defire  that 
which  cannot  be  had,  then  to  content  thcmfclvcsw'th  that  which  may)  (hall 
much  lament  the  lofs  of  the  reft,  and  be  lefs  pleafed  with  this,  becaufe  {o 
much  (though  indeed  we  know  not  certainly  whethetmuch  or  litde)  is  want- 
ing 5  I  would  defire  them  to  j:onfider  with  thcmfelvcSj  in  cafe  there  had  been 
twice  or  thrice  as  much  more  as  all  this  comes  tooj  what  fhould  have  been 
done  with  it  ?  For  my  pirt^  for  fo  much  as  is  here  fet  out  (all  we  had)  I 
thought  it  would  do  beft,  though  fomewhat  long,  yet  as  a  thing  very  extraor- 
dinary, and  of  great  confequence  to  many  good  purpofes  and  ufcsi  I  thought,' 
I  fay,  it  would  do  bed.  to  have  it  all  Printed;  Yet  we  had  fome  confiderati- 
on  about  it,  and  it  may  be  fbmc  others  would  have  thought  that  \t{s  might 
have  fcrved  the  turn :  But  I  hope  more  will  be  of  my  minde,  and  there  be 
but  few  adtioBs  but  alFord  fomewhat  that  is  extraordinary jand  for  fome  refpedt 
or  other  obfcrvabic  and  ufeful  5  Howfocverj  I  am  confident,  if  all  had  been 
extant)  (fiippofing  that  the  reft  would  have  made  much  miore)  that  none  or 

very 


The  Trefdce, 


very  few  would  have  thought  fictoha\elrintedall  j  and  f  ichad  oncccoir:^ 
to  a  contra6tio;i  or  abridgcrncnc,  it  may  be  much  lefs  then  this  muft  have  fcr- 
ve4 :  It  is  free  forall  men  to  think  as  they  plcafe  ,  for  my  part  all  th'ngy  con« 
fidcredj  1  finde  no  great  want  tof  the  reft  j  and  if  I  were  put  to  it,  I  cannot  tcH 
whether  I  can  fay,  that  I  wifli  more  were  extant :  yjet  itg  \cs  ncgreat  content, 
(and  I  hope  there  is  no  Blalphcray  or  Supcrilition  in  ir^  it  I  adfcube  !t  to  pro- 
vidence) that  after  that  long  intermilTion,  or  hiatus,  we  have  )cc  the  lait  Adti- 
onsof  aHj  whereby  it  might  appear,  after  many  goodly  flicws  and  pron  H(:y^.  fo 
much  hope'and  e\pe6tation  ;  To  many  Prayers,  fo  many  Thjiikgihe,^ and 
Humiliations,  what  the  end  is  of  dealing  with  Divcls,  and  iifing  ii  cans  thac 
are  not  lawful,  to  compa(s  ambitious  unwarrantable  defi res.  Bc(ides,  be  ic 
more  or  lefs  that  is  wanting,  yet  I  am  confident  we  have  the  ch'efei  p^ns  here 
pre  ferved  ;  as  patt'cularly ,  an  exad  account  of  his  addfeflcb  and  dealings  with 
the  £/;//7eror,- and  other  great  men  and  Princes,  in  the  vii.  and  fon.c  foliowing 
Div'fions  i  and  that  fad  ilory  of  their  fromifcmus  Copulation,  under  the  per- 
fwafionof  obedience  6o  God,  very  particularly  related  in  the  twelfth  Div  fi- 
on  ;  wherein  as  the  cunning  and  malice  of  evil  Spirits,  to  lead  away  from  Godj 
when  they  moft  pretend  to  God  andgodlinefs  ;  Co  the  danger  of  affe<St.ed  fin^^u- 
lariiy  andeniincncy,  (the  firft  ground  of  all  this  mifchict)  of  Sp-ritual  pride 
and  fclf  conceit,  is  emincndy  let  out  to  every  mans  obfcrvation,  that  is  noc 
already  far  engaged  (as  in  thefe  times  too  to  many)  in  liich  Princi- 
ples. 

But  yet  neverthelefs  I  muft  acknowledge^  that  there  is  one  paw  of  the  ftory 
wanting,  which  I  believe  by  moft  will  be  much  dcfired  :  Forwhcrcasatthe 
very  beginning,  mention  ismadc  of  a  Stonc^,  and. that  Stone  not  oncly  there 
mcnt'oned,  but  afterwards  in  every  action  almoft,  and  apparition,  throughout 
the  whole  Book  to  the  very  end,  ftill  occurring  and  commer  orated  as  a  prin- 
cipal things   whacitwas,  and  how  he  came  by  it  yea  and  what  became  of  it, 
wouH  be  known,  if  by  any  means  it  might  :     All  that  we  are  able  to  fay  of 
it.    s  th  s.  If  rpoo  ajiofie  in  which-,  and  out  of  which  ^  by  perfons  that  were  quali  - 
jied  for  it ,  and  admitted  to  the  fight  of  it  j    all  Shapes  and  Figures  mentioned  in 
e'vcy  ASiion  were  feen^  and  voices  heard:    The  form  of  it  wa  round,  a  ap- 
pcarctii  by  Ibme  courfe  reprelcntat'ons  of  it  in  thcMtirgJns,  as  pag.  9  v5. 599.' 
h.  41;}  b.  and  itfeems  to  have  been  of  a  pretty  bignefs  :   Ir  Icems  t  wa^.  moft  hke 
unto  Cry  lal,  as  it  is  called  fom.etimes,  as  pag  bo  Infpe&o  ChryJiaUoy  and  page 
^  77-  b.  nihil 'vifibile  apparuit  in  Chryfiallo  SacratOy  practer  ipfim  try f  alii  'vifibi-' 
li  formam.  livery  body  knows  by  common  e:N  per  cnce,  thac  (mooth  things  are 
iittcft.  for  reprefentations,  as  Glaffes  andthelik-'i   but  ordinarily  (uch  th'ngs 
onely  arc  rrp relented,  as  ftandoppofitc   and  are  vifible  in  thctr  fubft ance.   But 
it  is  a  jeer et  of  Magich^(which  happily  may  be  grounded,  in  part  at  leaji,  upon 
fome  natural  reafon,  not  known  unto  us)  to  reprefent  ObjeSis  >  externally  not  'vi-' 
fible^  in  f mooth  things  :    And  Roger  Bacon-  alias  Bacun)  in  a  M  inuicr  pt  nlcri- 
bed,  DediSiisi^faSikfalforum  Mathematicorum  (^  Ddemonunt  commnmc^Xfid 
unto  me  by  mv  Learned  and  much  efleemed  Friend,  D- .  f^mdett   Profeffor  of 
Phyfick  in  London,  hath  an  Obfervat'on  to  that  purpofe,  in  thcfc  words,  Hiii 
Mathematicis  in  malitiaftt^  completis  apparent  Docmonesfencibilitur  inform^  hu- 
inank  ©N  aliisfornm  i^ariis,  ^  dicnnt  ^  facmnt  mult  a  eismirabiliafecnndHin 

G  quod 


Ihe  Treface, 


quod  Dens  permittit .  AliqHando  apparent  huagina rie  ttt  in  ung  ue  piierr  'virghm 
carminati ;  (^  i^  pelvibus  ^  enjibus^  d^  injpathnl^  arietis  fecundum  mcdnm 
eornm  confecratk^  ^  in  cittern  rebus  politii :  i^  D^tnones  ojiendunt  ei^  omnia 
qU(£ petunt,  fecundum qmdDetts permittit.  IJnde puerifw injpicientes  respoli- 
tas'Vtdent  imagii-jarie  res  furti^/e  acccptas  C^  ad  qttem  locum  deport atxfum^  <^ 
qu<£  perfofi.e  afportai^erunt  j  (j;^  ficde  alii^^wultis^doeMones  apparcntes omnia  h^c 
illis  pejus  oflfndunt. 

Joach.  Camerarius  (that  worthy  man  before  fpoken  of )  in  his  Proemium  tt) 

Tlmarch,  DeOraenliSj  d^c,  hath  a  Ibange  Story  upon  the  credit  of  a  friend  of 

his  whom  he  much  rcfpected  (as  himfelf  profcfleth)  for  his  Piety  and  Wifdoin, 

AGKntleroan  q{'  Norlmbergh^d  a  Cryflal  (how  he  came  by  ic/is  there  to  be 

read)  which  had  this  \'ertuc;  Si  qua  de  re  certior fieri  'vellet^  c^c  if  hedefired 

to  know  any  thing  pall   or  future,  that  concerned  hiir,  yea,  or  any  other  (in 

molt  things^  let  a  young  Boy  (Cajinm,  orc -that  was  noc.yct  of  Age,  d^c*) 

look  nto  it,  hefhouldfirft  fee  a  man  in  it,  (band  fo  apparelled, and  afterwards 

what  he  defircd  :   No  other  but  a  Boy,  fo  qualifiedj  could  fee  any  thisig  in  it. 

This  Qryftal  became  very  faii^ous  in  thofe  parts  i  yeafoJLc  leafiicd  men  came 

to  it  tobefatisfiedin  doubtful  points,  andhad  their  quel  lions  rcfolvcd  :    Yetat 

Uft,  (as  Well  itdcfcrved)  it  was  broken  in  pieces  by  Camerarius  hh  Friend. 

Many  fiich  flor'es  are  to  be  found  of  Magical  Stones  and  Cryllals:  And  though 

VerneliuSi  De  abditis  rerum  caufis;  and  after  him  (as  I  rcn  ember)  one,  in 

worth  and  cfteem  of  all  men,  not  inferior  to  Fernelius,  Dr.  Har'vey-,  I.;tcly  de- 

ceafed,  uirns  the  relation  of  a  ilrange  ftone  brought  to  one  of  the  late  Kings  of 

France,  into  an  Allegory,  or  Phyficai  explication  of  the  power  and  proprieties 

of  the  Element  of  Fire  j  yet  I  am  not  fatisfied,  but  that  the  relation  might  be 

literally  true :   For  fo  it  is,  (as  I  remember  here  alfo,  for  I  have  none  of  thole 

Books  by  me  at  this  time)  related  by  Thuanus,  and  fo  by  feme  othcrsj  very 

learned,  underilood. 

Nowforthemaner  how  he  came  byir,  the  particulars  of  the  ftory  cannot 
be  had  by  this  here  prcfer/ed,  butonely  this  in  general,  That  it  was  brought 
unto  hi;n  by  fomc,  whom  he  thought  to  be  Angels  :  So  we  findc  him  telling 
the  Emperor  J  That  the  Angels  of  God  had  brought  to  him  a  Stone  of  that  <value^ 
that  no  earthly  Ki/rgdoin  is  of  that  worthinef^^  as  to  be  compared  to  the  fertue  or 
dignity  thereof.  Page  171,  in  his  conference  with  Dr.  Curts,  appointed  by  the 
Emperor  to  treat  with  him  3  andalfo  let  him  fee  the  Jione  brought  me  by  Angeli- 
calMiniJiery  :  And  we  findc  this  Note  recorded,  [Prague,  Tuefday  25  Sep- 
tembris.  Invent  to  Dinner  to  the  Spanifti  Ambaflador,  and  carried  with  me  the 
Stone  brought  me  by  an  Angel,  and  the  fourth  Boob^  wherein  the  manerofthe 
bringing  of  it  is  exprejfed.]  Aad  for  the  ufe  of  the  Stone,  befidc-.  what  hath 
hten  faid,  this  is  obfervable :  Some  Spirits  being  in  fight  of  JE.  if.  our  of  the 
Stone,  Dr.  Dee  would  have  the  Stone  brought  forth,  butE.  A",  faid.  He  had 
rather  fee  them  thus,  out  of  the  Stone;  to  which  the  Dodtor  replies,  That  in 
the  Stone  they  had  warrant  that  no  n?ich^d  Spirits  fhould  enter  ;  but  without  the 
Stone  iUuders  might  deal  with  them,  unlej?  God pre'vented  it,  ^c^  From  which 
paffagc  alfo  we  may  learn,  as  from  divers  Withers  in  the  Book  that  although  the 
ftonc  (as  we  faid  before)  was  theplacc,  in  which,  and  out  of  which,  ordinari- 
lyj  moll;  Apparitions  were  framed,  yet  it  was  not  fo  always ;   For  we  (hall  meet 

with 


T^he  Treface. 


with  divers  things  in  that  kindc  that  wercfcen  and  heard^  withojt  any  reference 
to  the  Stone  :  From  the  fame  place  alfo  wc  may  learn,  that  the  faid  Stone  was 
the  fame  he  alfo  called  the  Sherv-Jione ;  as  in  many  places  bcfides.  However^ 
it  is  certain  enough  that  he  had  more  Stones  then  one,  wh  ch  he  accounted  fa- 
cred  j  ohfcryM^rincipal  Stone ^and  this  other  Stone ;  'yifirji  SanBifiedStone^  nfti- 
a  I  Sherv -ft  07^  ^nd  Holy-ftone,  itiay  be  thought  oppcfed  and  different  j  but  I 
underlland  it  otherv*jfc:  This  is  the  account  wc  can  give  of  this  principal 
Holy-Stone.  And  to  liipply  the  defcdt  of  the  mancr  how  it  was  brought  to 
him,  the  Reader,  if  heplcafeymayfinde  fomiefatisfa^tion,  if  he  read  the /;/<j«er 
hovp  it  rras  tah^n  away,  andreftoredy  very  particularly  fet  down,  as  before  (up- 
on another  occafion)  was  obfervcd. 

Befidcsthis5'f(?«(;or5'/(7«ex,  there  are  divers  other  facrcd  things  mentioned, 
that  belongcd-coth'spcrfonatcd  Sanduary,  but  nothing  more  frcqujpntly  mien- 
tioncd  then  Curtains',  a.  Curtain  or  Vaily  as  it  is  fometimcs  calico .  A  man 
would  think  at  fir  if,  perchance,  ihatit  wasfomewhat  outward,  but  it  will  be 
found  other  wife ;  it  was  fecn  in  the  Stone,  and  appeared  of  different  forms  and 
colours,  as  they  that  read  will  quickly  finde. 

Next  unto  thcfcthc  Holy  Table  is  chiefly  conCderable,  ordcriiag  of  it  is  re- 
ferred to  Dt'Dee,  which  hedarlt  not  take  upon  himfclf^  until  he  had  war- 
rant from  his  Spiritual  Teachers :  This  Table,  which  may  well  be  called  Ma- 
gical, is  prefervcd  and  to  befeen  in  Sir  Thomas  Cottons  Library,  (from  whence 
we  had  thercR)  and  byhisleave  ishcrcrcprefentcd  inabrafs  Cutj  mention  is 
made  of  it,  as  I  take  it,  where  Dr.  D^e  propofeth  to  hisTeachersj  Whether 
}he  Table  (for  the  middle  crofs  of  uniting  the  4  principal  parts')  be  madeperfeSi 
cr  m :  You  may  fee  more  of  it,  it  is  alfo  called  League  Table,  Table  ofCo'venant, 
vtenfa  foederis  in  fome  piaces : "  The  Pedefial  of  it  is  mentioned  in  two  or  three 
places,  and  in:leed  a  very  curious  Frame  belonging  unto  it-,  yet  to  be  fcen  in  the 
faid  L'brary.  But  I  know  not  what  to  make  of  that^  neither  Nalu:  nor  the  Ta- 
ble appeareth  ',  and  the  roundTable  or  Globe  appeared  not.  I  bciieve  it  imifl  be 
underllood  of  fomcwhat  that  had  appeared  bcfo.re  in  the  flone.  The  Reader  , 
that  will  be  fo  curious,  by  careful  reading  may  foon  finde  it  out  j  I  was  not 
willing  to  bellow  too  much  time  upon  it. 

But  here  remainetha  main  buhncfs  whereof  wc  are  to  give  an  account  to 
the  Reader;  There  were  many  Tables  or  Schemes  at  the  end  of  the  Bock, 
containing  Letters,  a.b.  e.&'C.  difpofed  into  little  fquares,  with  an  Infcrip- 
tion  over  each  Table  in  that  unknown  Charader  (b.efore  fpokenof)  exprciled 
inufial  Letters  how  it  (hould  be  read^  There  is  one  for  a  Specimen  here  at 
the  end  of  the  Preface ;  the  re!!  wcreomitted^  becaufe  it  was  judged  needlefs, 
except  it  were  to  increafe  the  price  of  the  Printed  book.  For  firit,  Dr.  Dee 
himfclf  though  he  took  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  underftand  tlie  Myftcry  of 
them,  and  had  great  hopes  given  him  from  time  to  time  to  reap  the  benefit 
(himfelf  complains  of  it  in  more  then  one  place)  of  his  toilfome  work  and 
long  patiei^ce,  yet  it  never  came  to  any  thing :  and  if  he  made  nothing  of  them 
(to  benefit  himfelf  thereby)  what  hopes  had  we?  Befides,  we  may  judge  of 
ihefe  Tables,  and  all  this  myftery  of  Letters,  by  what  we  have  fcen  in  others 
of  the  fame  kinde.  Johannes  Trithemius  was  a  man  that  was  fuppofed  by  mo  11 
so  have  dealt  with  Spirits  a  long  time^,  and  to  have  been  inftrit€ted  by  them  in 

fomi© 


Ihe  Treface. 


orpc  of  thofe  fecrccs  that  he  pretends  unto  by  his  Books.  "  I  know  f^me 
have  thought  him  innoccEt,  or  ct  Icaft,  have  attempted  to  juilifie  him; 
Some  affed  fuch  things  to  (hew  the'r  wit,  and  think  they  (hall  be  thought 
much  wif;r  then  other  men,  if  they  contradict  received  Opin  ons,  though 
ther  van'ty  and  ftrong  conceit  of  their  own  parts,  be  rheAhief,  i^  not 
onely  ground.  Learned  and  Judicious  Ma  Icr  Vojpm,^  hath  fficwcd  himfclf 
very  wiJHngfO  think  the  belt  of  him  and  his  Book->5  yet  he  gives  it  over 
at  lall,  and  rather  concludes  on  the  contrary.  They  that  dare  defend  Jpol- 
lonim^  the  greateft  upholder  of  hthnicifm  that  ever  was,  and  by  molt  H-a- 
ih:ns  accounted  either  a  God,  or  a  Magician^  need  not  ibck  at  any  thing  m 
thiskindc;  But  fay  he  was,  what  any  man  will  haveof  him,  (^Frithemiffsvrtc 
foeakof,  h'sFolygraphy,  he  [ct  out  in  his  lifctiire,  dedicated  to  the  then  hm- 
pcror:  Hptelis  the  World  of  the  greatell:  wonders  to  be  done  By  it,  that  ever 
werchearaof:  AliVVifdom  and  Arts,  all  Languages:,  liloquence,  and  what 
not,  included  in  it.  But  I  never  heard  of  any  n  an  that  could  mske  any  thing 
of  it  or  reaped  any  benefit  inanyk-idej  wh  ch  I  'hinkis  the  reafon  that  his 
Steganography>  ment  oned  and  prom  led  in  this  firll  work  was  fo  long  after 
his  death  befote  ic  was  Printed:  It  v\as  expected  it  would  have  given  ron]c 
hghtto  thtfirft  i  but  neither  of  that  nor  of  this  latter,  could  ever  anything, 
that  ever  I  could  hear,  be  made  by  any  man.  I  have  good  ground  for  what  I 
fjy  :  For  befides  what  others  have  acknowledged,  I  finde  learned  Jlgimire, 
(who  in  his  old  cige  w  sgtown  himfelf  very  Cabaliftical,  or  it  may  be  had  fome 
diipofition  that  way,  though  very  learned  otherwifc,  from  his  natural  temper) 
as  much  grounded  in  that  book^  as  any  man  before  him ;  He  doth  plainly 
profefs  he  could  mske  nothing  of  it:  And  traly  if  he  could  nor,  that  had  be- 
llowed fo  m  ;ch  t.me  and  pains  in  thofe  unprofitable  (Indies,  I  fee  little  hopes 
that  anymaneife  (hould.  It  would  make  amanalmoft  hate  Learning,  to  fee 
•whatdotagc,  even  the  moillearnedj  arc  fubjeftunto  :  I  could  blefs  them  that 
knowubut  little,  fo  thcmfches  knew  it  is  but  little  that  they  know,  and  were 
humble:  But  it  commonly  falls  out  oth^rwifc,  that  rhey  that  know  but  little, 
think  chat  little  to  be  much,  andarcvcry  proudofit  j  whereasmuch  knowledge 
(or  to  fpeak  properly,  more  knowledge)  if  well  u(ed,  hath  this  advantage  that 
it  makes  m^en  noil:  fenfible  of  their  ignorance.  The  reading  of  Vigenaires 
book  of  Cyphers  (which  I  once  thought  a  rare  piccc;  cs  many  other  things  of 
the  fame  Author,  which  I  had  read)  hath  expreflfed  thefe  words  from  me  in 
th:s  place  j  and  becaufe  t  hath  fo  much  affinity  with  our  prefeiit  Theme,  I 
wasthebolJer  j  But  to  return.  Upon  thsconfideration,  the  Reader  I  hope, 
will  not  be  forry  the  rell  ot  the  'tables  (being  many  in  number)  were  omitted. 
Though  I  mult  addc  withal,  had  I  known  or  thought  any  ufe  could  be  made 
of  thein,  having  no  better  opinion  of  the  Author  (him  or  theni)  I  mean, 
from  whom  Dr.  Dee  had  them)  I  ftiould  not  have  been  \ery  forward  to  have 
had  a  hand  in  their  coming  abroad, 

I  Qiouldhave  told  the  Reader  before  butitmay  do  well  enough  here,  that 
befidej  the  particulars  before  fpecified,  there  wercoihcr  th'ngs  that  belonged 
to  this  holy  Furniture  (as  Dr.  Dee  fomewhcre  doth  fpeak)  whereof  mention 
is  made  in  lomc  places :  as  Carpet^  Candlefiicl{^,  Taper,  Table-Cloth,  Cufiion, 
and  Ibmc  others  perchance.    But  I  know  nothing  needs  be  obfcrvcd  upon 

any 


The  Treface, 


any  of  thefc  I  make  no  qucftion  but  the  Divel  in  all  chefc  things  had  a  rcfdcdt 
to  the  Ceremonial  Law  c/pecially  ;  as  alfo  in  thofc  words^  Moije  not,  for  the 
f  lace  if  holy^  often  repeated,  which  are  alfbelfe  where  expounded;  The  Inter- 
locutors in  all  this  relation,  are,  A.  (that  is,  Dr,  Dee)  and  £.  K.  that  is  Edw. 
Kelley  ',  and  the  Spirits,  to  the  number  of  foiix  twenty,  or  thcreabo-jts  fo 
many  named:  (Madinij  Efemeli^  Merifri,  Ath^  Gaiuah,  II,  Jubenladece  Ga- 
briel, Jam,  Moreorgratty  Jph,  Lasben,  Vriel,  Naluage^  Mapfama,  Aue,  llemefe, 
Gs'x.a,  Vaa,  Le'z/eanael,  Ben,)  at  leail,  but  whether  all  Inierlocucor,",  I  know 
not,  becaufe  I  do  not  remember,  neither  doth  it  much  concern. 

There  be  divers  marginal  No/^jandObfcrvations,  which  bcifigof  Dr.  Dee 
h'sown,  are  for  the  moft  pare  not  inconfldcrable,  and  (bme  very  remarkable 
all  therefore  hcrccxhibitcd  -,  bjt  whereas  in  fome  places  he  had  attempted  to 
reprcfent  theapparition,  or  fome  part  of  itj  in  Figures  alfo ,  this  being  done  but 
fomctimcs,  and  in  cafe  it  had  been  done  oftner  (except  it  were  to  fatisfie  the 
childidi  humor  of  many  Buyers  of  Books  in  this  Age,  whea  becaufe  they  buy 
not  to  read,  muft  have  fomewhat  to  look  upon  ;  whence  it  comes  to  paf , 
that  much  iradi  doth  pafs  for  good  warcj  for  the  trimming  fake,  and  on  the 
contrary)  of  little  ufc,  no  notice  i«  taken  of  it  5  except  fome  Figure  be  in  the 
Text  It  Iclf,  and  of  fome  confeq^ueacc,  for  the  better  undcrRanding  of  the 
reft. 

The  Gree\,  p.  25.  b.  is  cxaftly  fct  out,  as  \z  was  founds  and  yet  to  be 
fcen  in  the  original  written  by  Dr,  Dee  himfclf :  But  little  or  nothing  can  be 
made  of  it,  as  it  is  written  5  and  it  is  a  fign  that  Dr.  Dee  who  writ  it^  as  Edtp, 
Kelley  reported  it  unto  him,  and  afterwards  plodded  upon  it  (as  doth  appear 
by  fome  Conjectures  and  Interpretations  found  in  the  original^  and  here  alfo 
exhbited)  as  well  as  he  could,  was  no  very  perfcd  Greciaui  much  Icfs  Edw<, 
Kelley,  who  could  not  lb  much  as  read  it,  which  made  Dr.  Dee  to  write  fome 
things  diat  he  would  not  have  Kei/e)f  to  read,  in  Greek  Charaders,  though  the 
words  were  t  nglilh  :  I  would  not  alter  any  thing  that  was  in  the  Original : 
But  the  words,  Ibel'cve  fpokcn  by  the  Spirit  (and  fo  the  Greek  is  warrantable 

.enough)  were  thefe.  Oo7o$5  IVar^o^rS^o  ^fyov  dvagna^-.  Kofff/'Ot;  yatp  it^hfxoq  rvy^^avit' 
J*:  K]  ad73;'roffotJ?oi"7r£ie9^^e?ai: ''n^e  HOivyn;  a^jAxr^'sJa^  p?\.la.q :  E^a^^ /mrilivd  avIcHa' 
ipiffArw -na.f.i^y,'^ :  Tczg  yb  avra'/a?  KOfAi^yi  ma^axi.vd^ilat.i :  TV  ai  S'lx  iravUg  airciXdiTyi"' 

This  hhink  was  intended  of.Edrv.  Kelley^  who  was  ever  and  anon  upon  pro- 
jeds  to  break  with  Dr.  Dee,  and  to  be  gone,  as  here  prefcntly  after,  and  in  di- 
vers other  places  of  this  relation  ;  nay,  did  really  forfakc.him  fometimcs  for 
fome  time:  The  fence  c^er^^/Z/V^  is  this:  thii  fellow  (or  Friend)  wiU  oi/erthrow 
this  workXp^  Apparitions  you  muft  underftand,  to  which  he  was  requifite,  be- 
caufe r^c  Divel  had  not  that  power  over  Dr.  Dees  Body,  to  fit  it,  though  he  did 
promife  it  him^  for  fuch  fights.)  His  baggage '  or  fitrnitnre')  is  in  a  readinefl.And 
he  doth  'very  much  endeafvor  :  to  veithdraw  himfelf  from  this  common  friend- 
Jbip  .  Take  heed,  that  yottgi've  him  no  occafion  :  For  he  doth  mightily  plot  by  art 
and  cunning:  How  he  may  leafve  you  for  ever,  n^ly/^o^,  in  the  firft  line,  mav 
fecm  unufual,  for  ^'roif^og,  or  -n^l'^zp'^h  but  it  is  an  elegant  Mctaphoro.  '^n^taai 
for  vreisp^^&i,  is  not  ufual ;  and  happily  it  fhould  have  been  -^^e^'^^y  and  fo  utter- 
ed ;  biit  that  is  nothing.  Certainly  he  thatcould /peak  fo  much  Greei^,  (called 
here  Syrian,  to  jeer  Ed.  Kelley')  could  not  want  Latinc  at  any  time  to  exprcfs 

H  himfelfp 


Ihe  Treface. 


himfelfi  which  ncvcrihelefs,  might  be  thought,  where  we  finde  him  (peaking 
Evigl  ftj,  to  them  that  underrtood  It  not  5  /o  that  Dr.  Dee  was  fain  to  interpret 
it.  Bit  we  cannot  give  an  account  of  all  his  fetches  and  projects :  He  hadacon- 
fidcration,  Imakenoqacllion, 

I  cannot  thinkof  any  thngclfe  th:t  the  Reader  need  to  be  told,  that  is  of 
thisnat'jrc,  and  it  may  bcfomewhat  m.ght  ha.ebcco  fparcd;  However  the 
Reader  will  confidcr,  that  as  in  all  Books,  io  in  this:  It  is  one  thing  to  read 
from  the  beginning,  andlotogoon  W'thhcedand  obfcrvation,  without  skip- 
p  ng  i  and  another  thing  to  read  here  and  there,  which  would  require  a  perpe- 
tual Comment;  which  is  the  wretchednefs  of  molt  Headers,  in  tliefc  declining]; 
day^  of  Lcamin?  J  and  therefore  they  have  Comments  (0^  KhapfodL's  Vitlx^r) 
accordingly ;  fimiles  habent  labra  lactufeSy  never  more  true  of  any  thing 

It  may  be  fome  will  wonder  what  nade  the  Spirit*  ro  fall  upon  Ew^///^  Ge- 
nealogies  and  Srories ;  it  is  at  very  beginning,  therefore  I  take  notice  oi  it  for 
the  Readers  fake,  that  is  yet  (and  cannot  ochcrwife)  a  ilrangcr  to  the  Book: 
The  hnfirefs  is.  Dr.  Dee  was  larely  grown  ii  to  great  league  and  confederacy 
with  Albert  Lasky^(®T  a  lafco  rather)  a  great  man  of  Folonia.  You  had  before 
Wtiat  Cambden  ia  'hof  biii  of  his  cowin'^tQ  England^  at  this  very  time,  and  h's 
going  away,  which  doth  very  well  agree  wih  our  dates  here.  Ic  lecm?,  though 
nobfy  born,  and  to  great  dignity  yet  h's  thoughts  didafpirc  much  h'ghcr  j 
and  though  no  rich  man,  for  a  man  of  his  rank  and  c)ual  ty,  yet  c-Npeding  fuch 
matters  from  Dr.  Dte  2nd  hi4  SpiritSy  as  he  did,  he  could  findc  money  enough 
to  lupply  thtir  wat)tsupon  occalion.  The  Spir  ts  were  ve.y  glad  of  thcocca- 
fion,  and  dd  what  they  could  to  chcrCh  him  according  to  h's  humor  ;  Being 
then  at  that  very  tiiticiipon  dehberations,  that  much  depend. d  of  Jib  Laskey 
and  his  good  opiMicni  among oth.rthiigs,  his  Vedegrce,  which  muft  reeds 
pleale  a  vain  man  very  well,  was  taken  intoconfideration:  That  every  thiriig 
there  faid,  doth  exatftly  agree  to  the  truth,  as  I  do  not  warrant  it  To  neither 
am  I  at  leif.irc  at  this  time  to  take  thepains  to  examine.  We  mufl:  ne\  er  look 
funher  in  ihofe  thiigsthat  are  delivered  by  fich,  then  if  it  were,  or  be  perti- 
nent (rruc  or  falfe)  to  their  endard  prefentoccadon,  Befides,  it  is  very  pof- 
fible,  (which  I  dclire  the  Reader  to  take  good  notice  of^  that  both  here  and 
elfcwhere  the  Tranfcribers,  as  they  could  not  read  fomctin^es,  and  were  forced 
to  leave  fome  biaicks  (though  feldomc  to  any  confiderable  prejadice  of  the 
fence)  fothey  might milfakealfo,  having  todo  w  th  an  Original  thit  was  (and 
is  yet  to  be  feen)  fo  defaced  and  worm-eaten  as  th  s  is,  vvrittcn  (as  we  have 
faid)  by  Dr»  Dee  himfclf. 

Befides  the  avithent  ckntfs  of  the  Original  Copy,  written  by  Dr.  Dee  him- 
fclf; the  Reader  may  know,  that  the  Originals  of  the  Letters  that  are  here  ex- 
hibited, arealljormoil  of  them  yet  prefervcd,  and  to  be  fcenin  Sir  Xbo.  Cottons 
Library. 

IV.  I  am  now  come  to  the  laft  of  the  four  things  that  I  promifcdjtolhewthe 
£c\ era]  good  ufes ihit  may  be  made  of  this  Book,  and  which  were  principslly 
looked  upon  in  the  publifhing  of  it.  This  order  indeed  I  propcfcd  to  my  fclf, 
but  great  part  of  thisoccafion  offering  it  felf  upon  other  matter,  is  already  per- 
formed in  the  former  Difcourfe^  (o  that  but  little  is  now  left  to  be  done  •  How- 
ever I  willfum  them  up,  and  reprcfent  them  together,  that  every  Reader  may 

have 


The  Treface, 


have  them  in  rcadinefs  and  in  view  for  bis  ule  the  better. 

Thefirftisagainll:  Athcifts,  and  fuch  as  do  not  believe  that  there  beany 
Divcfsor  Spirits :  Wc  have  argued  it^  Iconfefs^  pretty  largely,  at  the  beginning 
of  this  Pifcourfe  or  Freface,  and  I  hope  fbmcmay  rccc  ve  competent  iat  sfa- 
d:ion  by  what  wc  havefa^d  :  But  if  no  Argument  had  been  ufed,  (letting  alidc 
Scripture  Authority,  which  would  be  impertinent  againR  Athe  ih)  I  do  not 
know  what  can  be  ir.ore  con\  incing  then  this  fad  Story,  (o  exadily  lo  part  cu- 
larly,  fo  faithfully  delivered.  Truly,  they  mull  fee  further  r  hen  1  do,  that  can 
finde  what  to  an(wer  (rationally)  and  to  oppofc:  This  is  agrcatpoint,  and  a 
great  ground  of  Religion  j  bat  this  is  not  all ;  For  if  thcrc^be  Spirits  mdccd, 
fo  w  eked  and  malicious,  foftudious  and  fo  induflrious,  to  delude  men,  and 
to  do  mifchicfj  which  is  their  end,  all  which  is  fo  fully  raprcfented  in  this  Rela- 
tion; then  certainly  muft  it  follow,  that  there  is  a  great  oxer-rufng  Power^ 
that  takes  care  of  the  t  archj  and  of  the  Inhab  taiits  of  it ;  of  them  efpecially 
that  adore  that  Power,  and  worfliip  it  w  th  true  afFedion  and  fmccrity :  For 
without  this  over  ruling  Power,  what  a  miferable  World  fliould  we  have  } 
What  man  r^iober  orinnoccnt,  that  could  enjoy  hinifelf  atany  tiracwithany 
comfort  orfecurity  ?  Butagain,  whatman  can  read  this  fad  llory  and  can  be  Co 
pcrlwatiedof  his  own  WiSom  or  innocency,  but  wili  in  fomc  degree rcfledl 
upon  hiirfclf,  and  will  be  mo\ cd  to  praifc  God,  that  notwithftanding  mauy 
provocat'onsuifeveral  k'ndcs  (as  damnable  curiofity,  open  prophanenefs,  fre- 
quent Ouhes,  Curfcs,  Perjuries,  feandalous  Life,  and  the  liktj  God  hath 
been  pleaicd  to  protcd:  and  prefcrvc  him  from  the  force  and  violence  of  fuch 
enemies  of  mankinde  ?     -^^ 

lizd  before,  fromlef.  beginnings  grcatefl:  confufions  had  enfued,  which  is 
very  true  as  in  the  cafe  oC  Bacchus  particularly  many  A'^es  before ;  and  in  the 
cale  of  Mahomet  afterwards  ("two  notable  lewd  Euthnftajis^  by  whoiiiips  Inftru- 
ments,  e'vil  Spirits,  by  God^  pcrmiflion,  brought  great  alterations  inGcvern- 
ments,  and  wroughtmuchmfchief  andv  llany  amon^  Men  and  Women)  we 
fha  lelfcwhcre  (hew  more  at  large.  By  due  confidcration  of  all  Circuir.ftaaces, 
aschirfly  their  confident  and  reiterated  AddrcfTcs  unto,  and  Attempts  upon  fo 
many  great  men  in  Power  and  Authority,  and  the  like  j  I  am  much  of  op'nicn 
that  thsfe  Spirits  had  as  great  hopes  of  Dr.  Pee,  as  ever  they  had  of  Bacchus  or 
Mahomet.  But  God  was  not  pie  Jed  at  that  tin  e  to  permit  that  their  malice  and 
fubtiltyfliould  prevail  And  I  chii  k,  if  we  confident  well,  we  havercafon  to 
pra  fc  God  for  it.  England  might  have  been  over-run  with  Anabiptifin  (when 
I  fay  Anabaptifm,  I  mxan  Anabaptifm  confirmed  and  in  full  power,  notasitap- 
peai  s  in  its  firft  pretentions)  long  before  this :  God  be  thaakcd  that  it  was  not 
then  and  God  keep  it  from  it  ftill,  I  hope  is  the  Prayer  of  all  truly  fober  and 
Religious  And  in  very  deed  I  know  no  reafon,  but  the  XY'^ildom  and  prudence 
of  the  r  iMlijefties  CounccI  thatthen  w^re,  inoppofing  Dr. JD^e/ frequent  ad- 
drsffes  and  Sollicitations,  may(underGod)  challenge  and  defcr^e  fomc  part  of 
Q  irThank?  and  Acknowledgement. 

Agaim  TheDivel  We  fee  can  Pray  and  Preach,  (as  to  outward  appearance 
wc  iLean;   for  truly  [and  really,  God  forbid  that  any  thing  facred  and  holy 
Ihould  be  thoight  to  proceed  from  Divcls)  and  talk  of  Sandi  ty  and  Mortificati- 
on, as  well  as  thebeft.  And  what  he  can  in  his  own  perfonj  or  by  h"mfelf  imme- 
diately ^ 


7  he  "Preface, 


diatclyj  there  is  no  queftion,  but  he  doth  by  his  Minifters  and  Inftru- 

ments  much  more,  more  ordinarily  and  frequently  I  mean  :  Let  any  man 

luuge  then,  whether  it  be  the  part  of  a  fober  wife  man,  not  onely  to  hear 

fuch  menascangivenoaccount  of  their  calling,  but  alfo  to  follow  them, 

to  embrace  their  Do6lrinc,  to  be  of  their  number  or  Congregation  j   and 

all  this,  upon  this  account,  becaufe  they  can  pray  and  preach  very  well, 

(as  they  think  and  judge  at  leaft)  and  talk  very  godliiy  and  zealoufly  > 

How  much  more  inexculable  they  that  will  clea  c  unto  (uch,  though  they 

fee  and  know  them  fcandalous  in  their  Lives,  Proud,  Infolent,  Ignorant, 

Seditious,  Intolerable,  becaufe  they  can  pray,  and  preach,  and  talk,  as 

beft  agreeth  with  their  own  humor,  and  gives  them  beft  content  ?  Can 

any  man  think  they  follow  God  in  this,  who  would  have  all  things  clone 

in  order^  and  is  not  di  Cod  of  Confufien,  (i  Cor.  14.  35,40.)  when  all  they 

do    tends  to  nothing  elfe  but  diforder  and  confufion  ?  1  confefs  it  is  pofli- 

b'e,  that  men  lawfully  called  may  prove  bad  enough,  vse  have  divers  cx- 

amplesin  the  Scripture      But  if  a  man,  fimply  and  ignorantly  be  mif-Ied 

by  fuch,  certainly  his  judgement  will  be  much  lighter  then  they  can  ex- 

peS:,  who  will  not  ufe  the  means  that  God  hath  ordained,  in  fo  great 

and  weighty  a  bufinefs  as  the  falvation  of  i'ouls  is.  I  know  not  what  thefc 

men  can  fay  for  themfelvcs,  except  it  be,  that  they  are  refolvcd  to  make 

ufe  of  the  Liberty  of  the  times  to  pleafe  their  humor  j  they  may  do  it,  but 

if  that  bring  them  to  Heaven,  they  have  good  luck. 

But  the  bufinefs  of  praying,  is  that  I  would  principally  in fift  upon  : 
You  fee  here  how  Dr.  Dee,  where  he  gives  an  account  of  hinifelF  to  the 
Emperorj  and  others,  bears  himfelf  much  upon  tW^,  that  fo  many  year* 
he  had  been  anearneft  Suitor  unto  God  by  Frayer  to  obtain  JFifdafi^fach 
wifdom^she  wasambitiojs  of.  I  believe  him,  that  he  had  prayed  very 
earncftly,  and  witK  much  importunity  many  times:  This  was  the  thini^j 
that  made  him  fo  confident  of  his  Spirits,  that  they  mufl:  needs  be  good 
Spirits  and  Angels.  1  know  a  man,  I  have  no  comfort  to  tell  it,  but  that 
I  would  not  conceal  any  thing  that  m.ay  be  a  warning  unto  others,  and  yet 
I  will  have  a  refpev2:  unto  him  too.- But  I  knew  ohe,a  very  innocent  man(in 
his  outward  converfation,  and  as  I  believe  very  really)  Humble,  Religious, 
very  Learned  and  Orthodox,  and  one  that  had  fuffered  for  his  Confci- 
ence,  as  others  have  done  in  thefe  times:  This  worthy  man,  being  en- 
gaged in  a  controverted  Argument,  upon  which  hisphancy  had  wrought 
very  much,  or  rather  which  had  much  vvrought  upon  his  phancy ;  he 
had  written  much,  filled  much  Paper,  and  was  defirous  to  communicate 
unto  me  as  his  friend  what  he  had  done:  But  when  I  perceived  that  the 
drift*  of  his  writing  was  out  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  to  (hew  the  ne- 
cefljty  of  fome  things  which  I  thought  of  a  more  indifferent  nature  i  I 
was  not  willing  to  meddle  with  it;  and  begun  to  argue  againft  his  main 
drift,  and  to  (hew  my  difliking.  After  many  words  to  and  fro,  he  be- 
gan to  prefs  me  with  this,  that  he  had  often  prayed  with  much  earneltnefs, 
and  he  vyas  very  confident  that  God  had  heard  his  Prayers:  Yea,  he  pro- 
ceeded fo  far,  that  if  God  were  true,  he  could  not  be  deceived,  and  ufcd 
many  other  words  to  the  fame  purpofe,  at  which  I  was  much  amazed,  but 

couM 


l^he  Preface, 


coulddonogood  upon  him,  fiich  was  his  confidence  and  violence  upon 
thisoccafion,  though  otherwife  a  very  moderate  ingenuous  man:  And 
thus  I  found  him  more  then  once,  or  twice.  Truly,  I  think  God  was  ve- 
ry merciful  unto  him,  that  took  him  away  in  good  time.  But  certainly  this 
bufincfs  of  Frayer  aiidpraifing^  is  a  bufincfs  as  of  great  comfort  (the  greateft 
that  mortal  man  is  ca-pabJe  of  upon  earth)  fo  of  much  more  danger  and 
d  lufion ,  then  many  do  believe.  And  if  caution  and  circumfpedion  be  to 
be  ufccl  in  any  thing  that  belongs  to  Religion,  I  think  it  ought  in  Prayer, 
as  much  as  any  thing.  And  fince  I  have  adventured  to  tell  one  llory  upoa 
mine  own  credit,  I  will  t  11  one  more  upon  better  authority,  which  I  have 
long  defired  (for  the  obfcrvablenefs  of  it)  to  conmunicate  unto  the 
world,  and  to  tharend,  had  once  inferred  it  in  a  Treatifeof  nine,  which 
I  thought  would  have  been  Printed,  but  it  was  not :  I  will  firll;  give  tha 
Englifli  of  it,  that  all  men  may  reap  the  benefit,  and  then  fet  it  down  in 
the  words  of  my  Author  (mmQ0\^'n¥2it\iQvIfdacCafauhcn^  of  b.m^  as  I 
have  it  to  fhew  under  his  hand. 

At  a  Co?ififtory  in  Geneva,  upon  a  Friday,  i8  July,  J  $  89.   the  cafe  of  one 
Mr.  Nicholas  hei??g  there  propofed  to  the  Affemhly  to  be  confidered  of  who  was 
vpont  to  infiny^atc  himfelf  into  pri'vateUoHJes^  jt?;der  pretence  of  praying,   and 
madefnull  congregations  :   Jhc  bufincfs  rvas  dijliked  by  the  Vaftors  i   ^irji,  be- 
caiife  nothing  in  the  Church  of  God  ought  to  be  done  without  order.  Secondly,  be^ 
caufe  to  turn  fnch  duties  of  Religion  to  matter  of  Traffick  to  get  money  onely, 
(without  any  other  endor  calling')  was  not  lawful.  Thirdly  andlaflly,  hisbatta- 
fogyy  (or  vain  repetition  of  words)  was  fiot  tobefuffered:   Then  upon  this  oc 
cafionitwas  related  by  Mr.  Beza,  that  the  Saturday  beforey  Tvhilefithat  (ha^p 
confliUwas,  trhichwe  had  before  our  eyesj  (to  wit,  between  the  Genevians, 
aid  the  Duke  c{  Sa'z/oys  Forces)  that  a  certain  Woman  addrejfedher  felft9 
him,  faying.    What  Mr.  Beza,  will  you  niah^  Prayers  here  ?  To  which  he  had 
anfweredy  No  :    What,  do  you  thinks  1  do  behold  thefe  things  rvith  mine  eyes  onely  > 
and  do  not  pray  to  God  in  my  heart  ?  Gz-vingtbis  reajonfor  his  anfwer  he  had 
mad:  to  the  Woman  :    [It  is  nor  fo  expreii^d  in  the  Latine,  that  the  fofow- 
ing  words  were  Be%as  words,  buc  the  coherence  of  matter  doth  fo  require 
it]  That  frayer  was  certainly  a  holy  thing,  which  it  did  not  become  any  man  to 
apply  himfelf  untOj  (or  to  undertake)  ivithont  due  preparation:   And  that  they 
were  deceived,  who  thought  it  foeafe  a  thi?tgto  pray  rightly  :   And  that  care  alfo 
Jhouldbe  taken    left  [underacolour  of  zeal  and  devotion]  a  way  be  made  to 
fuperjiition  :  The  Latine  words  are  thefe, 

I  Die  Veneris,  JuliiiH.  1589.  Cum  relatum  ejfet  in  co^tum^  de  Mag.  Nico- 
lao,  qui  infinutret fe in domos 'z/arias T^ZSP'^'^^'^^  ^v^ia^xi;,  (T^  jt^  aliquando  coe- 
tus^  etfi  parucs,  coirefolitos,  pajioribus  res  improbata  eji :  Frimum,  quia  ex- 
tra ordinem,  nihil  in  Dei  Rcclefia  fieri  debet:  Deinde^  quia  '^^o^/MfA^.v  facere 
rhrfri'jKilcivj  nefos.  Tertio,  homirns  /SxrloAo^i'a  non  fercnda  Narratum  efituni 
aBfe  die  Sabbathiproxime  prjecedente,  dum  acerrimum  iUud  pnelium  committe' 
retur,  quod  nobis  erat  ante  oculos,  interrogatwn  a  imdieracuU,  Quid  tn  D.  B. 
*vis  preces  hicfacere  ?  Rejpondiffe,  Nequaquam.  Tu  ne  enim  (ait)  me  putas,  hac 
ocidis  tantufftJpeSlare,  mcvotainanimoad  Deum  Opt.  Max.fundere  ?  Omni^ro, 

I 


T^he  Preface, 


resfanSia  y^^vyj^  adqnam  nonniji  vteditatnm  oporteat  accedere,  falluntur  enim 
qui  rem  pHtant  ejfe  facilem^  preces  bene  concipere.  Simid  ca^vendum^  ne  alicui 
fuperUitioni  'viam  iniprndentes  aperiamus.^ 

In  the  lad  place.  All  men  may  take  warning  by  this  example,  how  they 
put.thcmfclves  outof  the  protcdion  ot  Almighty  God,  either  by  prefum- 
ptuous  unlawful  wiflies  and  defires,  or  by  feeking  not  unto  Divels  onely,  di- 
rc£ily  (wi  ich  Dr.  Dee  certainly  never  did,  but  abhorred  the  thought  of  it 
in  his  heart)  but  unto  them  that  have  next  relation  unto  Divels,  as  Witches, 
Wi'Xj'z^ards,  Conjurers,  JJirologers^  (that  take  upon  them  to  foretell  humane 
events)  Fortune- tellers ^  and  the  like,  yea  and  all  Books  of  that  fub;c6l', 
which  I  doubt,  were  a  great  occafion  of  Dr^  Dees  delufion  :  That  men  are 
commonly  di  atcd  by  fu(h,  is  furc  enough;  and  thofe  that  arc  not 
very  fools,  would  take  heed  how  they  deal  with  them,  and  avoid  them, 
to  avoid  the  Imputaiion  of  Fools ;  but  thofe  that  are  wife ,  much 
more,  if  they  can  more  then  cheat ;  for  the  more  they  can  do,  the  more 
they  know  they  have  of  the  Divelm  them  :  Wretched  people  !  that  will 
not,  dare  not  trull  God,  who  as  he  is  the  onely  fountain  of  goodnefs,  fo 
onely  knows  what  is  good  for  every  mani  They  may  rejoycefor  a  time, 
and  applaud  themfelves  in  their  conceited  fuccfifes,  butmifery,  if  they  re- 
pent not,  will  be  their  end  ;  and  it  is  a  great  fign  that  God  is  very  angry 
with  them,  when  he  doth  fuffer  them  to  thrive  by  means  which  Himfelf 
hath  cur  fed* 


TOST- 


rt< 


FOSljt  RIPT. 

Since  this  Preface  Was  written,  and  almoft  printed,  I  was  fliewcd  a  Book,  entituled,  TheatrnmChe- 
inkum  Britanntcrtm,  &c.  by  EhoA  Afl)mole  Efq;  and  in  fomc  Annotations  there,  at  the  end,  an  account 
concerning  Dr.  Di?e  and  fii*.  Kellcy^  (there  (tiled  Sxt  Edmard  Kelley)  out  of  a  Dt.iryoi  Dt.Deesy  all 
written  with  his  own  hand :  As  I  do  not  queftion  the  Gentlemans  fidelity  in  this  bufinefs,  fo  I  make  as 
little  queftion  but  Dr.  D«'s  own  hand  will  be  found  to  agree  in  all  matters  of  Fad  both  here  and  there, 
if  any  fhail  take  the  pains  tocompare.  And  it  may  be  the  Reader  may  receive  fome  further  fatisfaftion 
in  fomc  particulars  by  his  labor,  which  is  the  reafon  that  I  mention  the  Book  here,  being  but  lately  come 
to  my  knowledge ;  His  Judgement  either  concerning  Dr.  D€e^  or  Kelley,  I  meddle  not  with  ;  andic 
may  be,  had  he  leen  what  is  here  to  be  feen,  he  would  have  been  of  another  opinion  in  fome  things* 
Here  is  enough,  I  am  lure,  to  fatisfic  any  man  that  is  not  very  much  preoccupied,  or  otherwife  engaged 
by  particular  ends.  As  for  thofcif-/?o;rj  concerning /C(?//if7,  ('fomc  whereof  concern  Dr.  D^e  alfo)  he 
tells  us  of,  as  I  believe  him,  that  he  hath  heard  (o,  (o  I  muft  (and  may  truly)  profcfs,  that  I  have  met  with 
far  contrary,  and  in  my  judgement,  and  by  this  account  here  given  us  by  Dr.  Dicy  much  more  proba- 
ble .-  And  particularly,  that  Kelky  was  put  in  PrKon  by  the  Emperor,  for  a  notable  Chymica!  cheat  that 
he  had  put  upon  him  ;  the  particulars  vvhereof,  though  they  were  fully  related  unto  me,  yet  I  will  not 
adventure  upon,  left  I  miftakc  in  fomc  terms  of  art,  or  petty  circumftance  of  fad.  And  let  the  Readec 
judge  by  that  account.  Dr.  Dee  (who  belt  knew)  doth  give  us  here  throughout  the  whole  Book  of  this 
Kelley,  whether  iVevers  Story  in  his  Fmerd  MonKm.  f<*g.  45,  415.  of  darrnable  Necromancy ,  and  other 
.  Dialfelic.il  (^enjuration^  pradiied  by  Kelley  in  Lancafhlre^  be  not  (bcfidcs  what  is  there  faid  and  attcftcd) 
much  more  probable,  then  any  thing  that  hath  been  or  can  be  (aid  by  others,  to  his  juftification  or  com- 
mendation :  Which  indeed  doth  make  Dodor  Vet's  cafe  altogether  inexcufable,  that  believing  and  know- 
ing the  man  to  befucha  one,  he  would  have  to  do  with  him,  and  expeded  good  by  his  Minifteries ;  but 
that  the  Dodor  his  Faith,  and  his  intellcdualls  (through  Gods  juft  judgement,  as  we  have  faid)  werefo 
much  in  the  power  and  government  of  his  Spirits,  that  they  might  perfwade  him  to  any  thing,  under 
colour  of  doing  fervice  unto  God,  yea  had  it  been  to  cut  his  own  Fathers  throat,  as  wc  fee  in  tbe  Rela- 
m»,that  they  perfwaded  him  to  lie  with  another  mans  Wife,and  profticute  his  own  to  a  vile,and,  by  liim- 
felf  bclived,  Diabolical  man. 

Befides,  I  have  been  told  by  many,  that  Dr.  Dee,  very  poor  and  every  way  miferabie,  dyed  at  Mon- 
lack.^  here  about  Z-aWi7»,  which  doth  not  feem  to  agree  with  the  report  in  thofe  .i*;?^^^*!"^^/ :  Eute- 
nough  of  them  :  Neither  indeed  have  I  faid  any  thing  at  all  of  purpofe  to  oppofc  the  Author,  but  to 
give  this  further  fatisfadion  to  the  Reader,  or  rather  to  the  truth,  which  I  thought  I  was  bound  to  do. 

The  pafTage  in  Wevers  Funeral  C^tonmncnts,  pag.  45,  46.  concerning  Kelley^  for  their  fatisfadion 
that  have  not  the  Book,  is  this;  Ketley,  (otherwife  called  T^/^ar)  that  famous  £«^/i7S  Alchy  mill  of  out 
times,  whoflyingoutof  h's  own  Gountrey  (after  he  had  loft  both  his  ears  at  Lancafter)  was  entertain- 
ed by  .S»i5!o/p/;  the  fccond,  and  iaft  of  that  Chriftian  name.  Emperor  oi  Cjermany ;  for  whom  Eliz^abeth 
offamous  memory,  fent(  very  fecretly)  Captain  Teter  Gwyn,  with  fomc  others,  to  perfwade  him  to  return 
back  to  his  own  Native  home,  which  he  was  willing  to  do  ;  and  thmking  to  efcape  away  in  the  night,  by 
ilealth,  as  he  was  clammei  ing  over  a  Wall  in  his  own  Houfe  in  Pragne  (which  bears  his  name  to  this  day, 
and  fometimcs  was  an  old  Sanctuary)  he  fell  down  from  the  Battlements,  broke  his  leggs,  and  bruifed 
his  body,  of  which  hurts  within  a  while  after,  he  departed  this  World. 

Sedqmrfptmhac}  youwillfay  :  Then  thus,  This  DiaboHcalqueftioningofthe  dead,  for  the  knowledge 
of  future  accidents,  was  put  in  pradice  by  the  faid  Kelley,  who  upon  a  certain  Night,  in  the  Park  of 
Waltoninle  dale,  in  the  County  of  Lamafter,  with  one  Paul  iVaring,  (his  fellow- companion  in  fuch 
Deeds  of  darknefs)  invocated  forae  one  of  the  Infernal  Regiment,  to  know  certain  paflages  in  the  life, 
as  alfo  what  might  be  known  by  the  Divels  forefight,  of  the  manner  and  time  of  the  death  of  a  Noble 
yongGentleman,  as  then  in  Wardfhip.  The  Black  Ceremonies  of  that  Night  being  ended,  Kelley 
demanded  of  one  of  the  Gentlemans  fcrvants,  what  ("<?>■/(?  was  the  la(t  buryedin  I-^jj' Church-yard,  a 
Church  thereunto  adjoyning,  who  told  him  of  a  poor  man  that  was  burycd  there  but  the  fame  day  .-  He 
and  the  faid  JVaring,  intreated  this  forefaid  fervant  to  go  with  them  to  the  Grave  of  the  man  fo  lately 
interred,  which  he  did  ;  and  withal,  did  help  them  to  dig  up  the  Carcafe  of  the  poor  Catiff^  whom  by 
their  Incantations,  they  made  him  (or  rather  fome  evil  Spirit  through  his  Oigans)  to  fpeak,  who  deli- 
vered ftrange  Predidions  concerning  the  faid  Gentleman.  I  was  told  thus  much  by  the  faid  Serv'-^-man, 
a  Secondary  Actor  in  that  difmal  abhorred  bufinefs ;  and  divers  Gentlemen  and  others  are  now  living  in 
Lancashire,  to  whom  he  hath  related  this  Story.  And  the  Gendeman  himlelf  (whofe  memory  I 
am  bound  to  honor)  told  me  a  little  before  his  death,  of  this  Conjuration  by  Kelley^  as  he  had  it  by  re- 
lation from  his  faid  Servant  and  Tenant,  onely  fome  circumttances  excepted,  which  he  thought  not  fitting 
to  come  to  his  Mafters  knowledge. 


Do^lojr 


A    Letter 


D''  Dees  Apology, 

Sent  to  the  Arch-Bidiop  of  C  a  n  t  e  r  b  u  r  y.    1 5  p  J. 

OR, 

A  Letter  containing  a  mofl  brief  Difcoiirfe  Apo- 

geticall,  with  a  plain  Demonflration ,   and  fervent  Proteftation 
for  the  lawfull ,  (incere ,  very  faithfull  and  Chriftian  courfe 
of  the  Philofophicall  Scudie:;  and  Exercifes ,  of  a  certain 
ftudious  Gentleman:  An  ancicnrvycrvant to  Her 
n:oft  Excellent  MajcftyRoyall. 

"to  the  mofi  Ke'verend  Father  in  Qod ,  ^the  Lord  Archhifhop  o/Canrcrbury, 
FrimateandMetropolitaneof  all  Enghnd^  one  of  Her  Majeflies  mofi 
Honorable  Frii'ie  Councell :  my  fingidar good  Lord. 

Oft  humbly  and  heartily  I  crave  your  Graces  pardon  ,  if 
I  offend  any  thing,  to  fend,  orprefcnt  unto  ycur  Gra- 
ces hand ,  (o  fimplc  a  Difcourfe  as  this  is :  Although,  by 
forre  fage  and  di'creet  my  friends  their  opinion,  it  is 
thought  not  to  be  impertinent,  to  iLy  moft  needful! 
fuits,prefentlyinh^nd,  (  before  her  m oft  Excellent  Ma- 
jeftyRoyall,  your  Lorcfhips  good  Grace,  and  other  the 
Right  Honourable  Lordsof  her  Majefties  Privy  Councell  )  to  make  feme 
part  of  my  former  ftudies,  and  ftudious  exercifes  (  vvithin  and  for  thefc  46 
years  laft  paft,  ufed  and  continued)  to  be  firfckno^^'n  and  discovered  unto 
your  Gr4«,andothertherght  Honourable,  my  good  Lords  of  her  Maje- 
fties privy  Councell  :  Andfecondly,  afterwards,  the  fame  to  be  permitted 
to  come  to  publick  view  :  Not  fo  much ,  to  ftop  the  mouthes,  and,  at  length 
to ftaythcimpudent attempts  ,  ofthcraih,  r.nd  malicious  devifers, and  ccn- 
trivcrs  of  moft  untrue,  foolifli,  and  wicked  reports,  and  fables,  of ,  and  con- 
cerning my  forefaid  ftudious  exercifes,  paflcd  o^er,  with  my  grtat,  (yea  in- 
credible^ paines,  tra-c!ls,  cares,  and  cofts,  in  the fearch,  and  learning cf  true 
Philofophic  ;  As,  therein.  So,  to  certifif,  and  farisfie  the  godly  and  unparti- 
all  Chriftian  hearer,  or  reader  hereof:  Th.it,  by  his  own;udgemfnt,(  upon 
hisdueconfideration,and  examination  cf  this,  no  little  parcel),  of  the  par- 
ticulars of  my  forclaid  ftudies ,  and  exercifes  philofophicall  annexed  J)  He 
will,  or  may,  befufficiciitly  informed, and pcrfwaded^  That  I  have  wonder- 
fully laboured, to  fiBd,{ol;ovv,uie,and  haunt  the  rruCjftraight,3nd  moft  nar- 
row path ,  leading  all  true ,  devour,  zealous,  faithfull,  and  conftant  Chri- 
ftian 


Apologeticall, 


flian  ftudcnts ,  ex  'valle  hac  miferU,  d^  miferia  ijiius  'vallis  :  ^  teiiebrantm 
Regno  i  e^  tenebrie  ijiiu<5  Kegni^ad montem fanS^nm  Syon  ^  ad cocleflia  tjbcrna- 
cula.   All  thanks^  are  moll  duf,thcreiore,,nnto  the  Almigiiy  .^^ccjfibj  it  o 
pleafed  him,  (even  froa  my  yoiith)by  his  divine  favour  ,  gr  ce,  and  h  Ip) 
roinfinuateintoii  yhe.^rtyaninfatiabh  zeal,  and  dcfire,  to  In.  w  his  truth  : 
And  in  l>im,  and  by  hiii»,incciiantly  ro  feck,  and  liden  after  the  famci  by  the 
true  Philofophical  method  and  harmony    proceeding  and  alcending,  (as  ic 
•wei:c')gradatim,iro:n  things  vifible,  toconfider  of  things  invifible     fro.n 
things  bodil;/ ,   to  conceive  ot  things  Ipirituall .  fro;n  ihingstranfit  ry,2nd 
momentary,  to  mediate  of  thngs  per.iianent :  by  things  mortal!  Qz/ifdle.nd 
in'z^ifible^to  hn\c  imc  peiCcycraLWC  of  immortality.    And   to  f.pncludc, 
iHoft  briefllyj  by  the  m  ft  mervailous  frame  ofthe  Tvhole  World ,  philofophi- 
cally  viewcd,andcircimilpc6rIywei^hed,numbred,andmcifured(ac(:ording 
to  the  ialent,and  gift  ot  G  0  D, ,'  rom  above  alotred,  for  his  divine  piirpofcs 
effecting  )  mofi:  fai  hfiilly  to  love,  honor,  and  glorifie  alwi^ies,  tl  e  Framer^ 
andCreatorthereoi'.      In  whofe  workmanfliip ,  his  infinite  goodnefs,  un- 
fearchabl   wi  do. i  e, and  Almighty  power,  yea,  his  everlafiing   power, 
and  divinity,   nay  (by  innumerable  means)  be  manifefted,  and  dc.i  on- 
ftrated.   The  truthof  which  my  zealous,  careful!,  and  .onftantintcnt ,  and 
cndeavc  ur  pecified,  may  ( I  hope  )  eafily  appear  by  the  whole,  full  and  due 
furvey,  and  confidcration  of  all  the  Books,  Treat!  les,  and  Difcourfes,  v^ho  e 
Titles  oncly,  arc,  at  this  time,  here  annexed,  srd  -xprefled  :  As  rhey  src  iet 
down  in  tSe  fixch  Chaper,ofanothcr  little  Khapfodtiall  Treatife,  intituled,^ 
the  Comp2ndiousKehearfaU-^<^c.v^x\iiQc abo  c  twoyears  fincc  :  for  thofe  hcc 
Majefties  two  honor  blc  Gomiflloners  j  vs'hichhermoft  Excellent  Majeliy 
had  n  oft  grat ioufly  fent  to  my  poor  Cotfage  in  Mortclacke  :  to  underftand 
the  matters,  and  caufcs  at  I'ull  i  through  which ,  I  vcas  fo  cxtrcamly  urged 
to  procur    at  her  Majefties  hands  fuch   Honorable  i^uf  eyors  a'.d  wit- 
nefles  t:>bc  :ftigned,for  the  due  proot  ot  the  contents,  o^^myiroft  humble 
and  pi  tifull  lupplicat  on,  o^hibited  unto  her  n  oft  Excellent  Ma  jefty  ,   at 
UamptonCouit^  An  i^^gi.    Ncvemb.  ^,  Thus  there  ore  (asfollowethj  is' 
thelaid  6,  Chapter  there,  rei:ordedrf 

^  My  labours  and  pains  bejiovpedat  di'vers  times^  to  pleafitre  my  native  CoHtt- 
trey :  by  »  ntingoffnndry  Book  s^ttnd  Jreatifes  :Jome  in  Latine/onw  in  Eng- 
liff\  and  fame  of  them  ,  vrritten ,  at  her  Majefties  commandeiffetJ. 

Of  which  Book  s,snd  Treatifes,  tome  are  printed ,  and  fomc  iinprin- 
ted    The  printed  Books  :  and  Treatifes  arc  thefe  following  : 

!•  "Y^Kop^deHmata  AphoriUica,  De  pr^fiantioribHsquibufdam  Nature  ^iVi 
j^  tHtibus.    Aphorifmi.  \io.  Anno. it; 5??. 

2.  Monas  Hieroglyphica,  Mathematicey  Anagogiceque  explicatay 
adMaximiiianHm(^Dei gratia)  Komanorum,  Bohemi^^d^ HnnganXy  Kegemfa- 
pientijjtmum^  Anno  1564^ 

3.  Epijiola  ad  eximium  Ducis  ZJrbini  Mathematicttm  (  Fredericnm  Com-' 
vtandimim)  prafixa  libello  Machdmeti  Bagdedini,  l)e  fn^e'^jiciernm  Di'vifioni- 
hmyeditQinliicem^  opera  ntea^  d^  ejnfdem  Qom  nandini.  Urbinaiis  j  Im-'rcfa  Pi-' 
fauri.  •  Anno  1570:./ 

K^  i^-The 


A      Le  T  T  E  R 

4.  the  Brytijh  Monarchy  (  etherrvife  called  the  Petty  'Navy  KoyaU ;  )  for  the 
folitiquefecurityi  abundant  wealthy  and  the  triumphant  jiate  of  this  Kingdome^ 
(  withGodsfa'vonr^ procuring^  Anno  ^  $ 7 6. 

5.  My  Mathematicall  preface  annexed  to  Euclide^  (by  the  right  worpipftll 
Sir  Henry  Sillingfley  Knight^in  the  Knglifli  language  frfl  pnblijhed^  ivrittenaP 
the  earneU  requeji  offundry  right  rvorJhipfuU  Knights,  and  other  'very  T»ell  learn- 
edmen.  Wherein  are  many  Arts,  o[  me  wholy  invented  (^  by  name,  defini- 

.  tion,  propriety  and  ufe,)  more  then  either  the  Graccian,  or  Roman  Mathe- 
maticians, have  left  to  our  knowledge,  Anno  1570. 

6.  My  di'vers  and  many  Annotations ^  andln'ventions  Mathematicall ,  added 
in fundrj  places  of  the  forefaid  EngliQi  Euclide^  after  the  tenth  hooh^of  the 
fame.  Anno  1570. 

7.  Epiflola prejixa  Ephemer idib ffs ]oh3inms¥e\de  Angli  ,  cni  rationem  de^ 
clarai/eram  Ephemerides  co?ifcribendi.  Anno  1557. 

8.  Faralafic.^  Comment ationii^  Fraxeofq;  Nuclem  qnidam.         Anno  1 5 7 3» 

The  unprinted Books  and  Treatifes,  are  thefe  ;  fomc, 

perfeSily  fnijhed :  ahd  fomCyyet  unfinijbed. 

p.  ^T~^Hc  firft  great  volume  of  Famous  and  rich  Difcoveries :  wherein  (al» 
J-  fo)istheHiftory  of  King 6W<wwtf«,  every  three  years,  h\s  Ophirian 
Voyage.  The  Originals  of  Presbyter  Joannes  :  an^^  of  the  firft  great  Chanty 
and  his  fuccefiors  for  many  years  following:  The  defcription  of  divers  won- 
derfuU  Ifles  in  the  Northern,Scy thian,  Tartarian,  and  the  other  moft  Nor- 
thern Seas,  and  necre  under  the  Nortn  Pole  .  by  Record ,  written  above 
1200.  years  (ince:  v\ith  divers  other  rarities.  Anno  1576, 

10.  TheBrytifhCcmp'ementjoftheperfed  Art  of  Navigation  i  A  great 
volume:  in  which  ,  are  contained  our  Queen  Elizabeth  her  Arithmetical! 
Tables  Gubernautick  for  Navigation  by  the  Paradoxall  compalTe  (of  me, 
invented  anno  i  557.}'"^  Navigation  by  great  Circles :  and  for  longitudes, 
and  latitudes- and  the  variation  of  the  compafle  finding  moft  cafily  ,  and 
fpeedily  :yea,(ifneedbc)  inoneminuteof  time,  and  lomctime,  without 
(ightofSun,MoonorStari  with  many  other  pew  and  iie^dfull  inventions 
Gubernautick,  Annoi<;76. 

11.  Her  Majefties  Title  Royall,  to  many  forrain  Countries,  Kingdomes, 
and  Provinces,by  good  leftimony  and  fufficient  proo'^  recorded  :  and  in  1  2, 
Velum  Skins  of  Parchment,faire  written :  for  hep  Majeftics  ufe  :  and  at  her 
Majefties  commandemcnt.  Anno  1^78- 

12.  Dcliiipcratoris Nomine,  Authoritate,  &  Porentia  :  dedicated  to 
hcrMajeftie,  Anno  I'^yg. 

13  ProIfgoTena  &  Di£iata  PariCenfia,  in  Y^mlidii  Eleircntorum  Geo- 
jnetricorum,  librum  pri|?um, &fecundumi  mCoWes^ioKhemenfi^Kn.i^'yO, 

14.  De  ufu  Globi  Coelcftis :  ad  Regem  Hdoardum  fextum.    An,  i  «>  $  o. 

15.  ThcArtofLogick,inl^'nglifli,  Anno  1547. 

16.  Thei3.SophifticallFallacians,  with  their  difcoveries,  written  in 
Englifh  meter,  •  Anno.1548. 

17.  Mercurius 


Apologeticall. 


17.  Mercurius  C{xlcftis  :  Jibri  24;  written  at  Lo^vayn^  An.  1549, 

18.  DeNubium,  Solis,LunsE,acreliquorum  PJanetarum,inim6 ipfius ftel^ 

]iferiCaIi,abinfimoTerra;Ccntio,diftantiis,miituirqjintervallis,&:corun- 
dcm  omnium Maghitudine  Whav ^-^^^^^'^^^^'^izAEdoarchim  Sextum ,  Anglisei 

Regem,  •  Annoi55.i. 

19.  AphorifmiAftrologici  500.  Anno  15  5-5, 

20.  The  true  caufbjand  account  (  not  vulgar)  of  Floods  and  £bbs  :  writ- 
ten at  the  requeft  of  the  Right  Honourable  Lady,  Lady  Jane,  Dutchefle  of 
Northumberland,  Anno  1553. 

21.  ThcPhilofophicall  andPoeticall  Originall  occafions  of  the  Confi- 
gurations, and  names  of  the  heavenly  Aftcrilhies,  written  at  the  requeft  of 
the  fame  Dutchefs,  Anno  1555. 

11.  The  Aflronomicall,  &:LogifticaIl rule"?, and  Canons,  to  calculate 
the  Ephemerides  by,  and  other  necefTary  Accounts  of  heavenly  motions: 
written  at  the  requeft,  andfortheufe  or  that  excellent  Mcchanicien  Ma- 
ftcr  Richard Cbaficelor,  at  his  laft  voyage  into  Mofchcz/ia.  Anno  1553. 

25.  Dc  AcriboIogiaMathematicaivolumenmagnuin  :  fexdecimeonti- 
nenslibros,  ^  Anno   ^555- 

24.  Inventum  Mechanicum,  Paradoxum,  Dcnova  ratione  delineandi 
Gircumfef  entiam  Circularcm  :  undc,  valdc  rara  alia  excogitari  perficique 
potcrunc  problemata,  Anno  1 5  5  <^- 

25.  Dc  fpcculis  Comburentibus ;  libri  fex,  Anno  i557. 

26.  Dc  Perfpediva  ilia,  qua  peritifsimi  utuntur  Pidores.         Anno  1 5.57' 

27.  Speculum  unitatis:  five  Apologia  pro  Fratre  Rogerio  Bacbone  Anglo: 
in  qua  docetur  nihil  ilium  per  Daemoniorum  fecifie  auxilia  ,  fed  philofo- 
phum  ftiiffe  maximum;  naturaliterquc&  modis  homini  Chriftianolieitis, 
maximas  feciffe  res,  quas  indodlum  folet  vulgus,  in  Daemoniorum  referrc  fa- 
cinora,  Anno  1557. 

28.De  Annuli  AftrGnimicimultipliciufu/i^.2.  Anno  ^557- 

2^.  TrochilllcaInventa,/i/'.2.  Anno  1558. 

20.   riefi  aj/<z.oibac7//.iv  S'fcoAo^'ixiVj  lib.  2.  Anno^5  5^* 

3 1.   Detcrtia&praJcipuaferfpe^livaE  parte,  qua?  deRadiorum  fra^ione 

traSat, //^.3.  Antioi555'- 

52.  Deltinerc  fubterranep, //^.2.  .  Anno  15 "^©^ 

23-  De  Triangulorum  redilineorum  Areis,  lih,-^.  dcmonftrati ;  ad  exel- 

tiffimum  Mathcmaticum  Fffr;w/'N(7«i///«  confcripti.  Anno  15^0- 

34.  Cabala;  Hcbraicae  compendiofatabella.  Anno  1562. 

35.  Reipublicse  Britanicae  Synopfis :  in  Englifli,  .  Anno  i5^5« 
•■■:.  35.  De  Trigono  Circinoque  Analogico,  Opufculum  Mathca  afiieunl 
&  Mechanicum,  W.4.  Anno  15^5- 

37.  De  ftellaadmiranda,  in  Cafliopece  After ifmo,  coelitus  demiiTa  ad  or- 

bem  ufque  Veneris :  Iteruinque  in  Coeli  penetralia  perpendiculanter  retra- 

fl:a,  poft  decimum  fextum  (uae  apparitionis  menfcm,  An.  ^573;; 

,g8.   Hipparchus  Redivivus,  Tradatulus,  Anno  ^57^ 

39.  De  unico  Mago,  &  triplici  Herode,  eoque  Antichriftjano.  An.M7°- 

40.  Ten  fundry  and  very  rare  Ileraldical  Blafonings  of.  one  Creft  or 
Cognifancej  lawfully  confirmed  to  certain  ancient  Arms,  lib.i.    An.  ^574. 

K  2  ./^i^Atlantidks^: 


A      L  E  T  T  E  R 

4.1.  Atlantidis/vulgariter,  Indiae ,  Occidentalis  nominatac )  emcndatior 
defcriptio  Hydrographica,  quani  uUa  alia  adhuc  evulgata,  An.  1580. 

42.Demodo  Evangelii  JcfuChrifti  publicandi,  propagandi,ftabilicndi- 
qiie,  inter  Infideles  Atlanticos :  voluracn  magnum  ,  libris  diftinQ:um  qua- 
tuor  :  quorum  primus  ad  Streniflimam  noftram  Potentiffimamquc  Regi- 
nam  Eli'i^ahetbam  infcribitur :  Secundus,  ad  fummos  privati  fuae  iacrae  Mjjc- 
ftatisconfilijrcnatores  :  Tertius,Hifpaniarum  Kcgcm^Philippttm  :  Qiiar- 
tus,  ad  Pontificem  Romanum,  Anna  1181. 

43.Navigationis  ad  Carthayum  per  Septentrionalia  Scythia:&  TartariiE  li- 
tora,Delineat!o  HydrogrdLphicz: Arthuro  PitySc  Carolojac^mano  Anglis,vcr- 
fus  illas  partes  Navigaturis,tn  manustraditajcum  admirandarum  quarundam 
Infularum,annotatione,in  illis  fubpolaribus  partibus  Jacentium,  An,   15^°' 

44.  Hemifpb.3erij  Borealis  Geographica  ,  atque  Hydrographica  defcrip- 
tio :  longe  a  vulgatis  chartis  diverfa  ;  /^nglis  quibufdam,  vcrfus  y^tlantidis 
Septentrionalia litora5navigationeminftituentibus,dono  data,     An.  1583- 

45.  The  Originals,and  chief  points,  of  our  ancient  Brytifti  Hi(lories,dif- 
courfed  upon,  and  examined,  An.  1583. 

46.  An  advife  &  difcourfc  about  the  Reformation  of  the  vxxXgdLxJiinan 
ycntc^  written  b;  hcrMayellics  commandement,  and  the  Lords  of  the  pri- 
vy Councell,  Anno  1)82. 

47.  Certain  Confiderations,ajid  conferrings  together,  of  thefc  three  fen- 
tenccs,  (aunciently  accounted  as  Or3icles(^Nofce  tetpfum  :  Homo  hiomim  Ve- 
ils :  Homo  Homini  Lupm^  An*  '59* 

48.  Dc  hominisCorpore,  Spiritu,&/^nnima  :  five  Microcofmicum  to- 
tius  Philofophiae Naturalis  Compendium,  lib  i .  Anno  ^ 59^ 

With  many  other  Books,  Pamphlets,  Difcourfes,  Inventions ,  and  Con- 
dufions,  in  divers  Arts  and  matters :  whofe  names,  need  not  in  this  Ab- 
fi:ra6i:  to  be  notified  :  The  mofl.  part  of  all  which  ,  here  fpccifi- 
ed,  lie  here  before  your  Honours  upon  the  Table,  on  your  left  hand. 
But  by  other  books  and  Writings  of  another  fortp  (  ifitfo  pleafeGod,  and 
that  he  will  grant  me  life, health,  and  due  maintenance  thereto  ,  for  fome 
ten  or  twcl  >  c  years  next  cnfuing  )  I  may,  hereafter  make  plaine,  and  with- 
cutdoubt ,  thisfentenoetobetrue,  Plnra  latent,  quJm patent. 
Thus  far  (my  good  Lord)have  I  fet  down  this  CatalogHSjOat  of  the  f  orcfaid 
fixt  Chapter,  of  the  booke,  whofe  title  is  jthis : 

49*  T'he  Compendious  rehearfallof  John  Dee  ,  hi^  dntifuU  declaration  and 
proofc  of  the  courfe  and  race  of  his  Jindious  life.,  for  thejp^ice  ofhalfe  an  hundred 
years^  now  (by  Gods  favour  and  help  )  fully  Jpent^  ^c. 

To  which  compendious  rehearfall,  doth  now  belong  an  Appendix  .^  of 
thefe  two  laft  years :  In  which  I  have  had  many  juft  occafions ,  to  confefTe, 
thatJHf?wo  Homini  Deuf  yznd  Yiomo  Homini  Lupus  ,  was  and  is  an  Argument, 
worthy  of  the  decyphering,  and  large  di!culsing:asmay,  one  day,  hereafter 
(by  Gods  help)  be  pubhflied,in  fome  manner  very  fi:range.  And  befidcs  all 
the  rehearfed  Books  &  Treatifes  cfmy  writiug,  or  handlinghitherto,!  have 
juft  caufe^Iately  given  me  to  write  &  publifh  a  TreatifcjWith  Title  (<;  o.)  De 
Mori'x.onteJEternitatis'.x.o  make  evident,that  one  AndreaaLibaviuSyin  a  book  of 
his,printcd  the  laft  yearjhath  unduly  confidcred  a  phrafe  of  my  MonasHyero- 
•  '  *  glyphica: 


PO  L  O  G  E  T  I  C  A  L  L, 


gliphica :  to  hismifliking ,  by  his  own  unskilfulncfTe  in  fuch  matter :  and  not 
underftanding  my  apt  application  thereof,  in  one  of  the  very  principal  pla- 
ces, of  the  whole  Book.      And  this  book  of 

mine,  by  Gods  help  and  favour  (  fliallbe  dedi-    mcmbred"''That ''''' ''''^  '"' 

catcd  unto  her  moft  Excellent  Majcfty  Royall ;    years  aler^hVwrSg  of 'JS 

And  this  Treatife  doth  contain  three  books  •  l-etccr,  idid  fomewhat  fatibfie 

,.  The  firft   Intituled.    D.  Hm^om/:  libn    tSTct^^TZ 

MathematiCHS  ^  fhyficm.  penning  fome  matter  concern- 

2.  The  Cccond,De/Eternnaie:tihertheolo(ricMf,    lyA''  ^V'^'!'  Sea-Sove- 

■Af        1    r        ^     n/    7  i  »^t«/«/i«c.*.j,     raigntie: under  this  title. 

MetaphyficjfS  ^  Mathematicus.  -  .     51.  ih^immHU^  Brytnmi. 

5,    The  third  ,    Dc  Honzofite  JEtermtatis  :        ^^• 
liher  Iheologicm  ^   Mathematicus  ^  (^  Hierotechni-  -^'^^ 

CU^.  ^^  Brytamco  Maru  Imperia^ 

^  Truly  I  have  great  caufe  to  praife  and  thanke    £t!  wf  "':7"'^"7  =  4- 

r^     i    C  r^  I'll         /-  tr  '^'^'^'''^  ^P^'^'o  i  celen  cenfcrtptA 

God,  tor  your  Graces  very  charitable  ufing  of  me :    f^^^-wo.  Anno,  i  J97.  Sepemk 
both  in  fundry  points  elfe,  and  alfo  in  yoar  favour-    ^°*  ^-^•«««A'*- 
ableyeelding  to,  yea  6c  notifying  the  due  means  for  the  performance  of 
her  Sacred  MajelHes  moft  gracious  and  bountiful!  difpodcion ,  refolution 
and  very  royall  beginning,  to  reft  ore  and  give  unto  me  (  her  Ancient  faith- 
full  fervant)  Tome  due  maintenance  to  lead  the  reft  of  my  old  daies  in  fome 
quiet  and  comfort ;  with  habilitie,  to  retaine  fome  fpeedy ,  faire     and  Or- 
thographicall  writers,    about  me 5   and  the  fam'e  skilfull  in  Latine  and 
Greek(at  theleaft:>fwell  for  my  own  books,  and  Works,  fair  andcorre<a 
ly  to  be  written  (fuch  I  mean ,  as  either  her  moli  Excellent  Ma')eftie,  out 
of  the  premifleswill  make  choice  of,  or  command  to  be  finiflied  orpub- 
liflicd  :  or  fuch  ofthem,  as  your  grace  (hall  think  meet  or  worthy  for  my 
farther  labpr  to  be  beftowed  00  )  as  elfe  for  the  fpeedy,  faire,  and  true 
writing  out  of  other  ancient  Authors  theirgood  and  rare  workes',  in  greek 
or  Latine :  which  by  GODS  Providence,  have  been  prefcrved'from  the 
fpoile  made  of  my  Librarie ,  and  of  all  my  movable  goods  here,  8cc.    Anno 
i5«:^.   *  In  which  Librarie,  were  about  4000. 
books  i  whereof,  700^  were  ancicntlv'writtenbv       *  Although  that  my  laft 

ijc^*/-/        r  •      r       ■  r  •'       voyageceyondthe^eas,  was 

hand  j  borne  m  Creck^  ,  lome  m  Latine  ,  fome  m  duly  unjenaken  (  byberMa- 

HebrcTifj  -^nd  fome  in  other  languages  ("as  may  by  i'^^'"  good  favour  and  licence) 

the  .vholc  CatahsH.  thereof  appeare.  )  But  the  ^t'-X^^^XZly 

great  lodes  and  dammages  which  in  fundry  forts  I  the  Right  Honourable  Lord 

have  fuftained,  do  not  fo  much  grieve  my  heart,  as  ^"f  ^?"^/^'  unto  your  grace  ia 

,  n     ,        jri  1  n°  ri-i  i     "^V  behalf ,  and  her  moft  Ex- 

the  rath,  Iewdc,tond,  and  molt  untrue  fables ,  and  ceilentMaicftie  willing  his  Ho^^ 
reports  ofme,and  my  Studies  Philofophicali ,  have  "°^  ^°  ^^  ^^-  ^»»«-  ^  590-  f^- 
done,  and  yet  do  3  which  commonly  ,  after  their  -'"•'^l """"''> 
firft  hatching,  and  deviliih  dcvifing,imraediately  with  great  /peed,aregenc» 
rally  all  the  Realraeoverfpread  i  and  to  fome,fecm  true  j  toothcr,they  are 
doubtfull ;  and  to  onely  the  wife,  modeft,  difcreet,  godly,  and  ch  iritable 
(and  chiefly  tJ  fuch  as  have  fome  acquaintance  with  me)  thry  appear  ,  and 
are  known  to  be  fables,  untruths,  and  utterly  falfe  reports,  and  (landers. 
Well,  this  (hail  be  my  laft  charitable  giving^  warning',  and  fervent  pro- 
teftation  to  my  Countreymcn,  and  all  othenn  this  x:afe  i 


B 


A     Letter 


A  fervent  P  R  O  T  E  $  T  A  T  I  O  N. 

Eforethe  Almighty  onrG  0  D,  and  your  hordjhips  good  Grace  ^  this  day, on  the 
periU  ofmyfotds  damnation  ( if  I  lie,  er  tak^  hii  name  in  i^aineherein  )  1  tahfi 
the  fame  G  0  D,to  he  my  rpithef^e.  That  with  all  my  hearty  rvith  all  my  fonl^with 
all  my  Urength,  power  and  ttnderHanding  (according  to  the  tmafure  thereof  which 
the  Alffiighty  hath  gi<ven  me  ')for  the  moU  part  of  the  time,  from  my  youth  hither- 
to,  I  have  ufed  and  Bill  ufe^  good^  lawfnll ,  honeji  ,  chrijiian  and  divinely  pre- 
fcribed  means  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  thofe  truthes^  which  are  meet ,  and  tie- 
cejlary  for  me  to  know,  and  wherewith  to  do  hii  difvine  Majejiy  fuch  feri/icc^  as 
he  hath^  doth,  and  will  call  me  ttnto^  during  this  my  life  '.for  his  honour  and  glory 
ad'uancing^andfor  the  benefit ^andcommoditiepuhlique  of  this  Kingdome;fo  much^ 
as  by  the  will  andpnrpofe  of  God  .^J  all  lie  in  my  skill, and  hah  ility  to  perform  :  as 
a  true^  faith  full,  and  mofl  fncerely  dutiftdlfer'vant^  to  our  moji  gracious  and  z«- 
comparahle  Queen  ^lizz^beih. ,  and' as  a  fery  comfortable  fellow- member  of  the 
body  politique,  governed  under  the  fcepter  Royal  of  our  earthly  Sitpreame  head 
(^  ^ee«  Elizabeth^  and  as  a  lively  fympathicall ,  and  true  fymetricall  fellow^ 
member  of  that  holy  and  my  flic  all  body,  Catholiquely  extended  and  placed  {where- 
foever  )  on  the  earth  :  in  the  vierp^  Knowledge,  direSiion,  proteSiion  ,  illumina- 
tion and  conflation  of  the  Almighty, moji  BleJ?ed,  moji  holy,  moji  glorious,  coma- 
jefiicall,  coet email,  and  coejfentiall  Trinity  :  The  Head  cfthat  Body,  being  only 
our  Redeemer,  ChriH  Jefus,  perfeSi  Cod  ?  andpzrfeB  man  •  whofe  return  in  glo- 
ry, we  faithfully  awaite-^  and  daily  doe  very  earnefily  cry  unto  him  ^  to  hajien 
hisjecond  camming  for  his  eJeSisfake  ;  ikiquity  dothfo  on  this  earth  abound  and 
prevaile,  andtruejaithwith  Charity  and  Evangelicall fimplicityjyave  hut  cold-^ 
jlender  andimcertrin  intertainment  amdng  the  worldly-wife  men  of  this  world. 

Therefore(^herein  concluding^  1  befeech  the  Almighty  God,  moji  ahutidantly  to 
ihcreafe  and  confrm  your  Graces  heavenly  wifedome,  and  endue  you  with  all  the 
refl  of  his  heavenly  gifts.^  for  the  relieving,refrejlHng  and  comforting^  both  bodily 
andjpiritnally  ,  his  little  fock  of  the  faithfull ,  yet  tftilitant  here  on  earthy 
Amen.  --'^^ 

All  Epilogue. 

Good  my  Lord,  I  befeech  Your  Grace,  to  allow  of  my  plaine  and  com- 
fortable E^z/<9j7;/j-  5  for  this  matter  at  this  time.  i.  Seeing  my  ftudious 
excrcifes  ,  and  converfation  civill,  may  be  abundantly  tcftified,  to  my 
good  credit^  in  the  moft  parts  of  all  Chriftendome  j  and  that  by  all  de- 
grees of  Nobility,  by  all  degrees  of  the  Learned,  and  by  very  many  other, 
ofgodly  andChriftiandifpofition,  For  thefpace  0^46.  years  triall  ■  (fasap- 
pearethby  the  Records  lately  viewed  by  two  honourable  witnieJTcs,  by 
Commifsion  from  her Majeftie^)  2.  And  feeing,  for  thcfc  36.  years  Jaft 
paft,  1  have  been  her  mofl:  Excellent  Majefties  very  true ,  faithfull  and  du- 
tifullfervanr;  at  whofe Royall  mouth,  I  never  received  any  one  word  of 
reproachj  but  all  of  favour,  ai^  grace  ••  In  whofe  Princely  Countenance,  I 
never  perceived  frowne  toward  me,  or  difcontentcd  regard,  or  view  on 


Apologeticall, 


mc  :  but  atall  times  favourable, and  gracious  :  ro  the  great  joy  and  comfort 
of  my  true,  faithf  jll,and  loyall  heart.  And  (thirdly)  Seeing ,  the  works  of 
sny  hands,  and  words  of  my  mouth(here  before  notified,  in  the  Schedule  of 
my  books,  and  writings)  may  beare  lively  vvitncilc  of  the  thoughts  of  my 
heart,  and  incljnati|^tmy  minde,generally,(asa.'l  wife  men  do  know,  and 
Chrift  himfelfdotj^Ruch, )  It  might,  in  mannei'  feem  needlcire,thus  care- 
fully (though  moinKiefly  and  fpeedily)  to  have  warned  or  confounded  the 
fcornfull, the  malicious,,  the  proud, and  die  rafli  in.thtir  untrue  reports, opi- 
nions^and  fables  of  my  jftudies,  or  exerciles  Piilofophicall :  but  that ,  ic  is 
of  more  importance,  thac  the  godlv ,  the  honeft ,  the  modefl ,  the  difcrect^ 
grave,  and  charitable  Chriiiian>s(E;;^///^  or  other,)  lovers  of  Juftice,  truth, 
and  good  learning,  may  hereby  receive  certaine  comfor:  in  themfclves  (  to 
perceive ,  that  Veritas  tandem  pr^ei/akbit^  and  fufficiently  be  weaponed  and 
armed  with  found  truth,  to  defend  ircagainfi:  fuch  kind  of  my  adverfarics : 
hereafter  they  will  begin  afrcfh  or  hold  on  obltinatelyin  tjieir  former  er- 
rofSjVain  in^aginations,falfe  rep:rt3,and  mofl:  ungodly  flandcrs  of  me  &  my 
ftudies.^Therefore,(to  make  all  this  caufc,for  evcr,before  God  8c  man,out 
of  all  doubt :)  Seeing,  your  Lordfhips  good  grace,  arc,  as  it  were,  our  high 
Prieff,  and  chief  EcclcfiafticallMinifter,  (  under  our  mofl  dread  and  Sove- 
raigne  Lady  Queen  Eli-^abeth)  to  whofe  cenfure  and  judgement,!  fubnaitall 
my  Ifudies  and  iixercifes  j  yea  all  my  Books  paft,  prefenr,  and  hereafter  to 
be  written,by  rac  (of  my  own  skill, judgement,  or  opinion,)  I  do,  at  this 
p'cfent  time,moil:  humbly,  finccrgly,  and  unfainedly,  and  in  the  name  of 
Aimghry  God,  (yea  for  his  honour  and  glory  )  requeft ,  and  befeech  youc 
Grace,  (when,  and  as  conveniently  you  may,  to  be  well  and  throughly  cer- 
ti6ed  of  mcj  what  lam,  Intns  <^  in cnte  :  Ke'verendijjime in Chrijio  Fater ,  d> 
Dignijfime  Arckipraf^^  cognbfce  d^  agnofce  i/idtwn  tarn  internum  ,  qudm  exte/y 
niimpecoristui  :  And  wherein  I  have  ufed,  door  fliall  ufe,  pen  ,  (peech  ,  or 
convcrfation,  otherwife  then  as  it  appertaineth  to  a  faithfull ,  careful!,  (in- 
cerc,andhumb!efervant  of  Qhri  I  jefu.  That  your  Grace  would  vou<:h- 
fafe  to  advertifc  me.  So,  I  trull:,  *Vltima  rejl^ondchnnt  primk  :  in  fuch  fort ,  as 
this  Autbentick^Kecord'in  La  tine  annexed  (ad  perpetuam  rei  memoriam  )  doth 
teilific;  having  never  hitherto  had  occafion  to  (hew  that,  in  any  place  of 
Chriftendome ;  to  teRifie  better  ofme,  then  they  had  proofe  ofme  ,  them- 
fclves, by  my  converfjtion  among  them.  (The  Almighty ,  therefore,  be 
highly  thanked,  praifed,  honoured  and  glorified,  for  ever  and  tvcr^Awen. 

But  now,  in  refpcftofthegenfrrdl  intent  of  this  briefe  difcourfe,  I  moll: 
h  jmbly,and  reverently,  exhibit  to  your  Graces  Vkw,  and  p^rufing,  the  ori- 
ginal' moniimrnt,  and  authentick  Record,  before  mentioned,  fair  writt  nin 
Parchment,  with  the  Seal  whole,  and  pcrfe^f^duly  appendant :  as  I  have  4-^» 
years,  ar.d  fomcwhat  longer,  prcferved  it.  The  true  Copy  whereof,  your 
^racc  doth  fee ,  to  be  'verbatim-^  as  followefh. 


%)m'verfis 


A    L 


E  T  T  E  R 


UNi'verfis  SanBdS  matris  Eccleft^e  fil'js ,  adqjws-pr^fe7ites  liters per'ventHra 
funt,  Vkecaficellaripts  CcXtnfq;  omnis  Kegentium  c^  fwn  Kegeniinm  ^  'Vni- 
fverfitatk  Cantabrigia^  Saint  em  in  Domino  fempitemam  ^  Conditioms  ^  Merita 
hominum  innoflra^niverfitdtejitickntimn^  affeSiu  fincer^oterpendentcs^  eoffoios 
tefliitionio  tiojlro  ornandos  ejje  arhitramur,  qnos fcimus  obf^ditionem^  C^  mormn,^ 
probitatem  promeritos  ejfe,  nt  ijiud beneficium  a  mbh  con^^tntnr  :  Qnamobrem , 
ckm  hoc  tempore  ipfa'veritastejiinwniumnojirnmfjbi  poUntat^  I'.'ftrcc  pietati, 
per  has  literas  fignificamHS'  Quod  dihBHs  nobis  in  Chrijio ,  Johannes  Dec,  Ar- 
tium  Magillcfj  in  diSia  noBra  ftni'verfitate  focliciter  'z/erfatm,phirimam  fibi  ^ 
doSlrind;  ^  honeflatis  laHdemcovipara'vit :  De  cujus  gradu  ^  (^  con'verfatione 
(jqnx  lonejijjjif}/afei7!per  fait,')  ne  qua  njpiam  ambtguitas^  aut  qn^x^io  oriri  pifpt^ 
apkdeoSj  qifibushnjus  'viri  'virtntes  hund fitii  inmtuennt^  'vijnm  efi  nobis j  in  di- 
Bi  Johx'inis  gratiamjoas  liter  as  nofirifs  Tejivnonialesconjcribcre'-y  C^  confcriptaSy 
publico  .dcaddmix  naftr^  ftgilloj  obfignare  :  qito^  major  em  apud'vos  authoritatenty 
Cb^pondm  liter$tnojlr<£habe'mty  Bene  q/alete.  Datum  Cantabrigise ,  in  plena 
Con'vocatione  Magisirorujn  Kegentiitm  (j^  non  Kegentium^  Academic  prxdtoix  : 
i^  .  Calend.  Aprilis,  Anno  a  Chrijio  nato.   if^48^ 

For  certain  due  refpefts  the  very  Image 
of  the  forefaid  Seal.isnot  here  in  portra- 
ture  publilhlij  the  Moto  Locus  veri  f'gilli^ 

Peroratio. 

THe  Almighty  and mofl  mercifull  God,thc  Fatherjforhis  only  5on  (out 
Redeemer )  Jefus  Chriil  his  fake  :  by  his  holy  Spirit ,  lo  direci,  bJeffe, 
andprofper  all  my  ftudies,  and  excrcifes  l^hilofophicail ,  (  yea,  all  my 
thoughts,  words,  and  dceds)henceforward,evcn  to  ihe  very  moment  of  my 
departing  from  this  world,  That  I  may  evidently  and  abundantly  be  found, 
and  undoubtedly  acknowledged  oi  the  Wife  and  Juft,  to  have  been  a  "zea- 
lous  andfaithfull  Student  in  the  ^chviol  of  Fer/V^,  and  an  ^  ncient  Gradu^Ue 
in  the  School  oi  Charity  :  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  fa  me  God  Aimigh- 
tyjand  t3  the  found  comfort  and  confirming  of  luch  as  faithful  y  love  and 
fear  \m  Divine  Majcftic,and  unfain  d  y  continue  in  labour  to  do  good  on 
earth  >  when,while,  to  whom,  and  as  they  may,  Amen. 

IVcry  fpedily  written,this  twelfth  even ,  and  twelfth  dayjin  my  poorc  Cottage, 
at  Mortlake  :  t>4nno.  1595.  iurrente  a  Natrvitate  Chrijli :  afi,  ^An.  1 5  94.C0W/- 
^leio^a  Coaceptioae  ejufdenty  cum  mvem  ^aurea  menjiltn,  Completis. 

Ahajes^  and  very  dutifully ,  at  jour  Qraces  commandement: 


Jo.  Dee. 


ATA 


Ofthefeveral  JHions contained  in  this  Book-  with  the  mofl 

Confiderable  Matters,  either  of  FctB  and  Miflory  \  or 
Do&ri/ie.  in   each  of  them. 


I.  Page  I. 

lie  firji  apparitim  of  Madlmi, 
inthejha.pe  of  a  Girle.     Alb. 
H  'Lz-ikj-ihisTedegree.     T'his  h.\, 

B  L.  (  whereof  more  in  the  Rre- 

H  face, )  being  the  firjl  defigned 

^^^^  bj  the  Spirits,  as  a  fit  htjirii- 

ment^  under  fretence  of  godli- 
neffe  and  reformation,  to  turn  all  things  j4pfide- 
downin  the  World  :  But  that  flat  failing,then  the 
Emperour  of  Germany :(i/'ffr  him  Stephen  King 
o/Poland  :  after him^  ?rince'Bi^o^\mht\:g,vc'ere 
thought  upon.,  and  applications  (  as  will  he  found 
here,  )  made  unto  them  to  that  end.  JVhat  al- 
terttions,and  deftrii&ions  of  men  and  kjngdoms 
•would  have  enfued  (  had  God  gixien  way.,  as  in 
Mahomets  cafe^  &c.  )  may  le  collecled  out  of 
^midry  pa jf ages  of  this  Book. 
^^  p.  3.  Anabaptiftical  exaggerations  of  the  gene- 
ral irickjdnejfe)  and  a  Promife  of  a  general  ¥\.e- 
formatiou  pj  A.  L.  Of  Ua.bc\  Lificr  tempted, 
andy  hidden  Trenfures. 

III  P-  5.  Mfjiical  numbers  ,  and  letters,  for  a 
Magical  Lamin. 

IV  ib.  Ed.  KeWey, his  rage  and  fury,how  reproved j 
a»i  appeafed.  7hehook,  the  ScroW^  and  the 
powder. 

V  p.  9-  Great  threatnings  of  future  judgements  in 
all  places. 

VI  p.  10.  Divers  Apparitions.  OfgoodJngels, 
never  appearing  in  the  fl;ape  of  vromen  ;  Tri- 
themius  his  ajfertion  reproved.  The  Book.  Di- 
vine infpiration.  (  Seealfo\>.  23.  as  thou  flialt 
find  me  to  move  thee,  and  divers  other  places,) 
j>ro,ni\ed  in  the  writing  ani  ord'ring  of  it, 
^  This  Book  (  had  th'ngs  fucreeded  )  jhould 
hav.-  been  i^fead  of  a  Bible  ;  a;  the  Alcoran, 
(  a:td  much  of  the  fame  fubf'&i  )  is  among  the 


Mahometans.    See  p.  18,    20,  61.  8cc.  Avery 

effectual  way  to  draw  people,  under  colour  of  a. 
New  Law,  new  lighrs  ,  ani  doSirines,  (which 
Anabaptifts  have  alw  ayes  fret  ended  unto  )  from 
Heaven. 

VII  P-  I4-  Divers  wyjiical  Apparitions,  and  di- 
fcourfes.    Chades  S[ed,  pojfejfed  and  difpoffeffed. 

VIII  p.  iS.  .  Ihe  Contents,  and  worthin<ffe  of  the 
Book.  ,  !V\iijv)i  '.     .  .... 

IX  ib.  A  fudden  Sun-ff.'ine.  The  Book  named. 
Some  lines  of  it.  Ed.  KeWey^s  pafigs, and  agonies 
at  f67ne  Vifiom,  hs^ore  Dr.  Dee.  Good  Angels. 
how  to  he  l\nown  from  evil. 

X  p.  20.  Prrmifcs  to  A.  L.  confirmed  by  an  oath. 
Ed.  KeViey  defirous  and  ready  to  raife  a  Devil 
by  his  Art.,  before  A.  L.  but  not  permitted  by 
Dr.  Dee. 

XI  p.  22.  Apparitions  before  the  Lord  Lasky  : 
The  Devil  pray eth._,  and  ('Anabapr'Ulically^  ie- 
waileth  the  wick^dneffe  of  the  World.  0/  Angel- 
Guaruians.  Suddm  death  fcntenced  againji  the 
L.  LaskifS  ftrvant,  for  interrupting,  though  hut 
cafuallyy  the  Aft'toii. 

XII  p.  23.  T/jt-Book,  a«^  divers  injhuciions  A" 
bout  the  wrJtii'g  of  it. 

XIII  P*  24.  Apparitions  in  the  air.  Ed.  Kelley 
fcandalizd  and  appeafed.  Prayers  for  him  tn 
Latine  and  Englipi  ;  compofed  by  the  Spirits. 

XIV  p.  25.  The  Prayer  :  the  ufe  and  excellency 
of  it. 

XV  ib.  Apparitions  and  Propbeftes,  in  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  Lord  h2.i\iY. 

XVI.  p.  2().  T^f  Book  tobewritten  (asitisnoc 
improbable  the  Akcran  was  :  )  by  Spirits.  Some 
thinz,s  uttered  in  Greeks :  (  of  which  fee  in  the 
Preface  )  Ed.  Kelley  preparing  to  be  gone,liayed 
with  the  promife  of  "^o  pound  yearly. 

XVll    p.    28,   Divers  informations   and  rautism 

given  (  by  Spirits  )  teDx.  Dee,  concerning  fecrec 

[  ^  'J  enemies 


The  Table, 


enemies  at  Court,  Sec.  Strange  mjjieries  csacern- 
'  ^  ing  Guardian  Angels.  Al.  Lasky's  Se<r/. 
"ICVfll     p.   30.    NewprJiikj  of  Kellyes.  Dr.  Dee 
\^inuchftrplexed.   Dr.  Dee  himfelf  heareth,  &c. 
More  of  the  L.  Laskies  Pedegree.     The  rftjjiery  of 
tSe  Trinity,  Faith,  Hope,  and   Cliariry  :  Ed. 
Kelley  drfgnffiffcd  (inpev')  of  winy  devUs. 
XIX    g^  33.  Dr,  Dee,  andkis  Company ^fet  out  of 
\  Mor:tjck  (  in  EngUnd^  net  fur  from  London,) 
'  ''for  Cracovia,  in  Poloniu.  Their  danger^  and  de- 
_.  Uyerance  at  Qiieenbo.ough. 

XX  ibid.    Divers  Jpp^ritioiis.    Serwirt-Hkf  Jtuff 
"„  delivered  hy  the  Spirits  (  in  Latine)  who  tell  Dr. 

Dee  tha.t  it  vas  they  that  had  preferv:d  him  in 
his  late  danger.  ^  ^^''J  ''\^6'  indeed  that  thej 
ypere  the  immediate  caufe^  as  of  the  danger,  fo 
prefervation  a-t  that  time,  to  have  the  f/fore  hold 
■^ '^tipm lurtif^r  tfif  tiiiKto  come,  For  they  tell  him 
Sfieii  of  lil  'afterwards. '  <f .  A,  continuation, of  the 
iaurney.        '->.'..       ^    *    -•   "'     '      -      .''  » 

XXI  p.  35.  Apparitions  in  the  pr efface  of  the  H. 
Lasky,  Mojl  things  here  in  Lafine,  for  hii  fal^e. 
^  A  continuation  ofthejournej/. 

XXII  p.  36.  Several  Apparitions.  Some  evil 
fpirits  (  he  ack^iowledged  }  appear  ,  and  bLif- 
phtme. 

XXlK    p.   3(7;    Sermonlikf    Ihff,   of  mortifica- 

■  tion,  &c.  Dockum,  (  in  Germany  )  to  be  de- 
'firoyed,    men  wo:ncn,  and  children,   or  favid 

^:Jft)^r.  D^espleafnre :  as  bis  Spirits  makj  him 
believe.     ^  A  continuation  of  the  journey. 

XXlV  p.  41.  Stag^-likf  carriage,  and  speeches, 
(^fuchas  isfeen  and  heard  in  Pulpits fometimes,  ) 
0/ Spirits  5  at  which   Ed.    Kelley  if  offended  j 

•^  bow  excufed,    Prophefies  and  threatnings  of  great 


■Koes. 


XXV    p.  ^■^.Dr.Vce'ifeveralguejiions  of  world- 
ly   toncernments  ,  eluded  hy    Sermon- liks   jiuff 
of  Santtification,  &c.     and    fon:e    idle  Appa- 
ritions. 
9  Anabaptiftical  P/-e<^/flio/K  ^.f  great  Commotions, 
SdC.    and^  Clirijis  Terreilia!  kingdom,  p.   46. 
^  Continuation  of  the  journey. 
XXVi     p.  47-    Dr.  Dee  (  to  his  great  grief  and 
'     amazement )  rebutted  for  his  abode  ,  and  afti- 
onr,  in  unfaiiftified    place.'.     ^  Th'-  confiant 
pxahice  of  his  fpirits  ,  when  they  could  not  per- 
form what  they  had  promifed,  to  makj'  him  he- 
,    lieve  it  was  for  his  or  fome  of  his  companies  of- 
fences, and  provocations. 
:  XXVII     p.  45?»    Glorioiif  Promifes  made  to   Dr. 
Dee.     His  prefent  ejiate  in  England  not  very 
-'t  &'>0'i-     ^^'^   douhteth  thii  p-efent  Apparition   to 
be  illufions  of  Devils  ;  and  it  muck  troubled. 
XXVIII    P-    5 1-    Gods  Greatneffe,  Juflice ,Zlc. 
fet   out  i)i  a  prophetical-likf  Jiile.      His  Spirit 
twofold. 
'XXIX  p.  52.  Some  fpirits    tell  Dr.  Dec,  all  for- 
mer apparitions  were  but  illiifuns  of  evil  fpirits, 
and  he  made  a  fool  by  tJ>em.     ^  And  all  thit 
\  while  he  fuppofcth  thefe  to  be  the  temptations  of 
tl^eVevil,^  to  make  him  the  m  re   confident  at 
tther  times,  when  the  Devil  appeared  unto  him  in 
a  better^fl.'afe,  and  didmoii  abufe  him. 
XXX  p.  54.  -^  eontinuation »f  the  fame  TrojeU. 


Examples  of  dangerouf  iliufions. 

XXXI  p.  55.  A  continuation  here  alfo.  Chunfel 
given  to  Do&or  Dee  to  burn  his  blafphemou?, 
(  which  he  accounted  mod  holy  )  Books.  ^  A 
continuation  of  the  journey. 

XXXII  p.  56  The  fame  Project  here  alfo.  'The 
conclufion  of  this  (  perfonated  )  tempt  at  ion,  by  the 
apparition  of  better  (  asiifuppofed  )  fpirits. 

XXXIII  p.  57.  Sermon-'tke  ^uffof  hurd\\\ty,'pcv- 
feverance,  &:.  Cabaliftical  diclrine  of  emana- 
tions. &c.  Aib.  Lasky  excepted  againjl^  and 
fome  pramifes  revo!{ed„ 

XXXIV  p.  59.  Some'places  of  the  ApoczlypSf 
and  of  Efdras  applyed  to  thefe  Aftions. 

XXXV  p.  60,  Efdras  agam.  Strange  Predi- 
dions  Qbut  Anabapciftical,  and  falfe ')  of  the 
dcjlrntiion  of  Kings  and  Kingdoms  ,  within  few 
yean  after.     The  New  Book,    to  be  injiead  of 

the  Bible.  (  See  before  ,  the  contents  of  the 
Sixth  Aftion.  )  ^  A  continnati.n  of  their 
journey. 
XXX Vi  p.  62.  Apparitions  :  good  (  fo  efleerntd  ) 
and  evil  fpirits  contcii.  Ed.  Kelley  rebuked  for 
his  Magick.  New  Lights  of  doHrhte  promifed. 
The  holy  Language,  (wor  Hebrew,")  and  the 
venue  of  it.  Gabale  of  nature.  Chrifi^sTct- 
reftial  Kingdom  :  as  before. 

XXXVII  p.  (55.  Chrtii  to  be  revealed.  Do&or 
Dee's  wife  and  maid  threatned  by  Apparitions. 
His  affairs  in  England.  Sir  Henry  Sidney 
falfly  reported  dead,  by  fpirits.  Alb.  Lasky 
confpired  again'f.     Cracovia  promifed  to  DoSer 

■,  Dee  a  place  of  re;}  :  (^and  againp.  70.) 

XXXVIII  p.  59  DoSor  Dee's  quejHons,  mt  an- 
fwered.  '"   "• 

XXXIX  ibid.  The  queftions  again.  Mydical,  and 
CzhaXifkic'iXelufions.  Some  things  obfcurely  an- 
fwered. 

XL  p.  71.  Alb.  Lasky  in  part  rejeded,  as  unwor- 
thy :  yet,  to  be  King  of  Moldavia,  ^  Their 
coming  to  Cracovia. 

XLI  p.  73.  IhefeVifcns  and  Anions  magnified, 
as  incomparable  mercies  and  favours.  The  Tri- 
nity acknowledged.    Cabaliftical  myileries. 

XLII  p.  76.  Great  myjieries promifed.  49  Tables. 
49  Calls,  dr.  Their  virtue. 

XLIII  p.  jj.  An  illufwn.  A  further progreffe  in 
the  Cabale  o/Tables  and  Calls  :  with  fljew  (  in 
the  fpirits)  ofnuirvelltm  reverence. 

XLIV  C  p.  78.  )  The  firji  Table.  Myfiical  num- 
bers and  letters,  &c.  >  '-. 

XLV  p.  80.  Ed.  Kelley,  a  Magician,  andfhr 
it,  reproved.  Further  proceeding  in  the  pro- 
mifed Cabale.  Great  cppoftien  of  -witkfd 
fpirits  (  injhew  )  whtleji  this  wonderful  Gibale 
is  delivered. 

XLVi  p.  82.  A  Prayer,  Qin  words  zealous)  nfed 
by  the  fpirits,  prefer ibed  to  Doctor  Dee,  &c,  Pro- 
eeedings  in  the  Cabale.  More  oppofition  (in  (hew) 
of  wicked  fpirits-  Bodily  reverences,  and  pray- 
ers, often  rfed.  The  firft  C  all  ended.  The  ufe 
and  vertue  of  it. 

XV II  p.  £8.  More  oppofition  (  lufhew)  of  wicked 
fpirits. 

XL  VIII  p.  89  The  Sabbath  (»r  Sunday^to  he  kept 

XLlXib. 


-The  Table. 


XLIX  ib.    More  ofpfition :    yet  the   vork^  pro- 

^ccedeth. 
L  p.  91.  Nothing   appeareth.     Ed.  Kellcf  (upon 
'  ?fioi  grounds  )  very  confident-,  that  they  were  De- 
vils all,  that  had  appeared  hitherto  :    and  their 
pretended  myiieries,  very  fopperies.  Sec. 
LI  ib.  Kelleyj  of  that  mindjii//,  and  refolved  to 
brain    Doaor   Dee.      Do&or   Dee's  great  confi- 
dence  (  but  upon  little  erounds :   whereof  fee  tn 
the  Preface  ;  )  of  the  contrary. 

Lll  ib.  KcWey  refr('ved.  The  mjderieofNum- 
bcrs.  The  Creation :  Fall  of  Adam.  TL' 
language  he  fpak^e  ,  &c.  ^  Ed.  Kelley  re- 
conciled. 

LIIl  p.  93.  Somewhat  heard  by  VoBor  Dee  al- 
foy  to  his  wondering.  Sermon-likj  fluff  of  Pre- 
delii»atioM.,EleCfioniScc.  delivered  by  fpirits.  Ike 
Keyes  .•  Iheir  ufe  and  vertue.  Move  not,  8cc. 
C  often  repeated  )  explained .  The  work^ 
goes  on. 

LIV  p.   199.  the  wor}^ goes  on,  but  not  without  (^as 
.  is  conceived^  oppofition. 

-IN  p.  102.  Myiiical  Apparitians :  explained  and 
applyed  to  Dodor  Dee,  &c.  the  holy  Book 
to  he  written  by  God  hiwfelf  according  to  fro- 

--  wife. 

LVI  p.    104.   A  prayer :  thework.goeson. 

LVII  p.  III.  Myjiical  Apparitions  explained. 
New  injiruaions  for  future  A^ons.  the  Dayes, 
the  dreflc  of  the  place. 

LVJII  p.  ii5-  A  paralle  again'}  Ed,  Kelley, 
vho  contejieth  w-th  the  fpirits  about  the  lawful- 
ttejfe  of  hii  Magick  ;  yeildeth  nevertheleffe  to 
bury  in  the  ground  hit  Magical  Books,  and  Cha- 
rafters ;  which  is  accepted,  fo  one  of  27  be  burned. 
An  Apparition  pew ing  (^  as  it  proved')  the pre- 
fent  ejiate  of  A.  L. 

LIX  p.  118.  Ke\\ey''s  obedience,  the  worl{,goes on. 
the  former  cere.nonies  ufed. 

LIX  ....  Ed.  Kelley  at  lali  very,  well  fa" 
tisfied ,    that  all  is  fiom  God :   and  very  de- 

\.  fOHt. 

■'tX  p.  138.  Gods  power-  He  not  tyedto  time,  the 
Incarnation  o/C^ri/r  ackjtowledged.    Warnings 
.    to  Al.  L.  and  promifes. 

LXI  f.  139.  Calls,  Aires  :  IFhat  and  how  to  be 
ufed.  Diviiions,  and  Governments  of  Angels. 
Divilions  of  the  Earth.  Al.  Lasky,  hu  cafe. 
Mapfantii,  or  Die  nobis,  under  Gabriel.  Jef  s 
acknowledged.  Good  LtjhftSiijns,  Humility ,  Sec. 
AgoodViiycty  ill  applyed. 
LXll  p.  146.  An  illuder.  Obedience,  Faith, 
without  which,Gods promifes  not  irrevocable.  Ex- 
amples in  Scripture,  the  Cabale  of  Calls,  &c. 
.    as  before. 

LXlIi  p.  153.  ^A.KcWty  doubtful  again,  the 
parts  of  the  Earth  :  revealed  unto  Ptolemy,  hy 
an  Angel.  Some  Characters  and  Prophefies  of 
divers  places  of  the  Jf^orld.  (  Soniemiftakcn, 
I  believe,  )  Conftantinople.  the  Turk,  the 
Arke  of  Noe.  the  place  of  Paradife,  Eli, 
Enoch,  John  .•  where  referved.  A  contradi- 
.  ,^5 ion  observed  by  DoUdr  Dee,  not  anfwered  by  the 

'fpirits.   Rome. 
^  the  fpirits^  (  upan  good  gniafds  )  fufpe^fd^  and 


anfwered  by  Ed.  Kelley, /or  illiMrs,  and  cozen- 
ers :   who  is   oppofed   by  t))Cior   Dee,  with  mmh 
confidence^  and  fame  appearance  of  reafon.  Some 
Mifiakjs  in  the  Writing,  jroni  whatciufe. 
LXIV  p.  159.  Ed.   Kelley  very  bold  (  «W  per- 
'  verfe,  as  cenfured  hy  Doctor  Dee,  )  ^ith  the  fpi- 
rits :   (yet  not  without  good  ground    of  rea- 
fon ;  all    well  confidercd.  )   Ike   Book  ;    the 
leaves,  dimenfions,   and  other  particdars  of  it  : 
Not  to  be  written,  but  by  Angels.'   Al.  Laskjr  yet 
in  favour. 
LXV   p.  160.    God  all  in  all.    the  "Devil  in  perpe- 
tual oppofition.     How  dangeroui  ^  truly  fpoker\, 
though  by  the  DevH,  )  to  deal  with  hi-n.  Infi- 
delity piinifhed.     Anahaptiftical  Prophefies   and 
Promifes.   Al.  Lziky  fi.fpecied. 
LXVJ  p.  162.    Ed.  K.  reproved,  and  exhorted  to 
repent ;  earneflly,yea  with  tears,  infi:ew.   Devils 
and  their  bvfmeffe,  both  with  good  and  bad.    Some 
Cabaliftical  fluff,  pronrifcd. 
^  p.  164.    Ed.  Kelley 's  Coufelfion  of  heretical, 
y  damnable  opinions  by  him  held  and  believed.   Hu 
repentance,  abjuraiian  of  M igical  arts  andpra- 
Bices  ;  converfion  unto  God  ;  believed  by  DoCtcr 
Dee  (  upon  great  probabilities  )   to  t-e  he.zrty  and 
fincere.  His  th^nk,s  to  God  for  it. 
^   165.  More  of  Kelley's  converfion.    No  Appa- 

rition,and  why  :  divers  conjeSinres  of  Dr.  Dee. 
LXXVII  p.    166.  Apparitions  to  conifort  and  con- 
firm Al.  Lasky. 
LXVIII  Vifions  ^m^;?  Apparitions  to  Ed.  Kelley, 
firji  alone  :    then  jn   the  pre  fence  of  Djcior  Dee  .* 
the  vifitation  :  tlie  tiiercies,ofGod  :    Great prO' 
mifes.   Expofiti.n  (  iy  fpirits  )  of  the  Vilion. 
^  Ed.  KeWey  tempted,  and  doubtful  agitin. 
LXlX  p.   171.  A  Vifo't  to  Ed.   Kelley,  ani  Al, 
Lasky  :  w/r.i);^^)*^;//^^  c«f  fl/f/.?^  Pfalms.  , 

LXX  p.  171.  Fz/rw/i/T.-o/ fif Tabic:  crcffes,Scc. 
the  Tableof  ftf  Harth  :  Governour, Angels,  ice. 
the  Bock,  (the  title  of  it,  Lee  thofe,  &c.')  and 
dodnne  of  Enoch,  reve^'ed  wtto  him  by  fpeciall 
favour:     counterfeited  by  D.  and  Magicians  : 
their  Charaft;.'rs.     MjlHral  Tables,    Figures, 
Words,  &c.  Liica  (pirltus  Saiifti  (a  horrible 
profanation  5  but  fuch  are  moft  C-ibaliflicaliay- 
fterics)  myiiial  croJfes^Scc.Sohiiion'^k.nowledge, 
(if  you  Will  teiieve  them)  how  far  it  extended. 
^  LXXl  p.  178.  the  Csb3\e goes  on.  the  wonder- 
full  extent  of  it.      Difeafis  how   to  he  cured,  or 
procured  by  it.  Money  coined,  and  uncoined, 
given  by  whom. 
^LXXlIp.  iSi.LXXIIIp.  183.   Tfaefecretsof 
States,  (fo  tri:hrmi::s  too:  we  have  his  tables  : 
but  never  was  any  nnn  the  wifer;  whereof  more 
in  the  Preface  :  )  Medicine  :    Chrift  his  earthly 
Kingdom.  All  things  in  tkefe  Tables.  .\vsfi/ddeft- 
ly  gone  :    Madimi  appeareth  :  Do&or  Dee  wanteth 
money,  but  can  get  none.    A  gingling  Q  but  falfe  ) 
Prophefie,  concerning  the   Emperoiir  to  fucceed 
Rodolph.  (  See  alfo  p.  243-  ) 
%  Ed.  KeWey, his  rage  andrcvHing,much  difiikedby 
Dr.  Dee;   repented  of  by  Kelley  himfelf :  taken 
notice  of  (hit  repentance)  by  the  fpirits.    An  ex- 
tfaordinary  (Jo  apprehended  by  D.  Dee  )  florm  of 
thunder  and  Rain. 

[*  2]  ^LXXIV 


The  Table, 


^   I.XXIV  ibid.    Mire    CabalilHcal  hijiruaims 
(^fomewhat  lil\e  Magick ,  as  KcWey  thopgbt  ;  ) 
concerning   the  priiCiice     of  it.     Dreiidftd  Tro- 
fhefies,  of  fudJen  aher-itions  in  tbi-  PVorld.  h\. 
Lasky,"  in   favour.'    The  Book    to  le  prepared, 
&.C.      Ed^  Kelley  a  pirfecl  Magician,  b)  hit  own 
arkj:cvp!edge}}reKt. 
^  LXXV  p,  185.  Fat/c/ice    ani  Uumility^   com- 
irieaded.   A  pretty  f.smlitude  (  if  true  :  whereof 
fee  in   the  Preface;)  of  fhe    Adders  den  It  nf^ 
with  heryomiz-     InfiJe'iit/jfow  ,^rf.it  a  fin.   Jet 
Ed.  KcWcy jrill  tncredulon,;,  for  all  thify  andviry 
refcUire. 
^   LXXVI   186.  CKrift,    h'n   coming  in  Triimph, 
3i.c.     'i be  Bool{_  of  hwocaoon.     S-'ta^:s  (^preten- 
ded )  oppofiifiH.     Some  Pro^hefies,  Prom/fes,  and 
In'h'.iCitons. 
LXX^/lI  p.    187.    Some  (jueflioits,  I'clonpyig  to  the 
Czhzlc,  partly  eli^dedipiirtlj   anfn-ered.     Invo- 
cacions  of  good  Angels.   Sec  Prayers  ««t  alltwcJ, 
and  why.    Evil  fpirits,  how  to  be  dei:lr  with.    7he 
Boo}{_  of  Invocations  ;  and  now.  Set  Prayers  al- 
'    lowed  of. 

LXXVIII  p.    iSj?.  Sermon-like   fluff,   of  the  ufe 
of  nfiiCti"}!,  &c.     Sjwe  pronufi'S  to   Vcdor  Dee 
and  Ed.    KtUey.     A  Progreffe  in  the  Ca.ale 
of  Calls. 
LXXlX  p.   195.  Volior  Dee  and   hit  fe'lovp  re- 
.  proved.     Voiior  Dee,  with  gxeat  humility,  doib 
anfwer  for  hinifelf.     Enoch  :    the   Book,  deli- 
vered unto  hi  »i  (  the  fa  we  in  fiibliance,  as  this, 
they   fry  : )    />/    Cod.     Hit  Prayer ,  Humility 
&c.       . 
LXXX  LXXXI  p.    197.  Jhefpirits  appoint  their 
tiy}ie,  and  appear.      Ihe  precife  time  of  Chiifts 
comiiis;  ;  and  other  Prophefies,  not  revealed  unto 
■men,  {or  three  reafons. 
LXXXli  LXXXIII  p«  198.  199-      the  fpirits. 
Sec.  oi  before.     Jhe  nineteen  Calls,  and  their 
beginnings. 
LXXXIV  p.    200.    More  Calls  and  viyferies  ; 
bvt  not  without  (  pretended,  )  oppofition  of  wickj- 
edfpJrits.    Adam's //?//,  Jhe  Cur(e  upon  it,  and 
the  'ffect  of  it. 
LXXXV  p.    20(5.     M(j>f  Calls  and  Aires,     y^n 
apparent  ccntradifr'in   olferved  by   Do£ior  Dee; 
hut   cunniy/gl)/   evaded    by    the  fpirits.      Voaor 
Dee,    hii  Hynine,   and  fpiritual  (  but  not  froyn 
God  ,  hecaufe   not  well  gr-iind-d  :  )  rejoycing, 
f    and   thanksgiving.     His  fon   Roland   in  gre^tt 

danger. 
LXXXVl  p.   210.   VoPor  Dee's  centefl  with  his 
fpiri's :   he  offe^  ts  hii  ovrn  tnnocenn,  and  (  to  tt.-e 
..  Mtmoji  of  bii pcwer  )  obedience  :  but  it  buffiedby 

the  ffirits.   Al   I.,  reje&ed. 
LXXXV U  p.    211.    Tefame   cotitcA profecuted 

hcrea.lfo:  with  fonte  threatni:izs. 
^   Iheir  coming  to  Prague.        <^   Sonte  Chimical 
gibb]i(h  C  fit  jiuffte  anmfe  i:nfettled  braines  : ) 
fcvnd  in  the  hovfe,  concerning  the  Piiiloiophers 
Stone:     Kead    there,  ( and. 
nupta  m,  &c. 
^    p.  215.     Some  conjeciures , 
,    of  Doiior    Dee's,  upijH  fome 
tare. 


i\  rubeo   m.  lit 

and   weditaticus 
places  of  Scr>l~ 


LXXXVIII  7be  VI  Viol;  in  the}  A^<?f^9r 
lypfe  •,  M  under jiood  by  Vocior  Dce..v  rd 
very  good  blefling,  pronounced  by  an  evill  fpi- 
rit.  Divers  Woes  denounced.  Somewh(Lt  ef 
Voaor  Dee's  JFitfe  :  Al-  Lasky.  Dodor  Dee, 
fent  to  Rodolplius  Eniperour,  with  a  «'effa^g^as.., 
from  G^id.  >H^ai  ' 

LXXXlX   p.  217.  The  Angelical  Book.  New  or- 
ders about  it.    Al.  Lz^Vy-itl.ough  rejected,  yet  to 
be  great  for  a  while,  Inlpiration  prowifed  t»  Dr. 
De  ,  about  a  Letter  to  the  Emperonr. 
^     A   Copy    of   the   faid   Lett,  v    (  by    iiifpira- 
tioii  probably  enough  offpirits,   <tf  tf  man  may 
£butffe  by  the  fluff,  )  to  the  Emperour,    Secrecy 
defired. 
XC  p.    219.      Sermon-like    fluff.    Ike  power    of 
God.     Stvfral  Woes.    The  Trimcy,&c.    Vr. 
Dee  not  beinr    willing   to  be  put  off'  Unger,  tl^e 
fftri's,    (  againii  their  wills  )  makf  fome  pro- 
greffe in  the  Cabalc.  Doiior  Dee ,  in   the   exe- 
cution  of  Gods  Will ,  to   proceed    with    fury, 
&c. 
XCI   p.   2  22.      Doaor  Dee,  Jhi/rply  reproved  (  by 
examples  cut  of  the  Sciiptnres,  &c.  ")  for  chufing 
(  when  it  was  put  to  hi*  choice')  rather  prefent  petf- 
fo'-mance,  than  longer  delay.  ,^. 

XCII    p.    223,        2he   fame   matter    here    alfe. 
Ihe  yeares    of  I'odor   Dee's  ///e,  73.     and   t 
half ;  (  which  perchance    might   come   very 
near  to  the  truth,  if  we  Could  certainly  knovr 
when  he  died  ;  )   determined.      Ed.  Kelley  to 
die  v'lilently  :   (and  fo  he  did:   for   endea- 
vouring an  efcape  outofprifon,  he  brake  a  leg, 
and  died  of  ic  5  as  generally  reported  .•  ^Doctor 
Dee    doth    repent   and    revoke  his   choice ;    in 
very  good  language,     had   it  bten  upon   a  good 
ground. 
^     Doe,or  Dee's    Letter    td  the  King    of  Spain 
hif  Agent  (  or  Amballadour  )  with  the   Empe- 
rour,  about  his  Letter  ;  and  weans  of  accejfe, 
to  the  Emperour. 
XCllJ    Several  cjueftiens  prtpofed  by  DoCtor  Dcci^ 
The  fpirits  jhrtwdly  put  to  it  about  a  lye  which 
they  hud  told  ■■,   and  yet  by  the  help   of  Caba- 
\\?f\C3\qnerks  lif"^  diiunaions,   (  but  tfpeci^llyy 
o/Anabaptiliical  infatuations   in  DoUor  Dee,) 
they  come  off  with  credit.    In  what  fenfc  Dallor 
Dee  might  truly  fay.    That  himfelf  had  feen, 
whatfvever  Ed  KcWsy  had  fen.     ^  Did  or  Dee 
hii  Letter,  and  Prefent,  graciovfly  received  by.the 
Emperour.  _■!    p 

XC'IV  p.  228.  Apparitions  ,  y.ot  in  ''ihjf^ 
Stone.  The  priv/ledge  of  apparition  in\the 
Stone.  The  Myjierie  of  the  Trinity,  R.«a-> 
fon  an  enemy  to  God,  (  to  Delvfion  indeed, 
and  wildneife :  found,  and  fober  R.eafon ;  ) 
Of  the  fpirits  would  have  it.  Ihe  Empe- 
rour thre^atned.  The  names  ef  the  fpirits  now 
appearing,  and  bow  to  be  found  in  the  Cabali/li- 
cal  Tables.  .  ,  '         .   ,  ,.; 

G  Some  drunken  pranks  of  Kelley's,  And  why  here 
recorded.  <[  ^ /fttfr  o/t^fSpanifliEnibafladoiir 
hi^  becrecary  to  DoUor  Dee,  whereby  be  doxh 
fignifi '  the  Lniperours  defire  and  appo/ntmeth, 
to  have  htm  cotne  to  him.     Oftavius    Spinola, 

Chamber- 


'.  5»'The  Table. 


-ehstwherUhiy  Sec.  brings  him  to  hUn-  An  accofmt 
UivbatwaifaidoHhoth  fides.  Vodor  Dee's  Mo- 
rtal r  of  which,  fee  more  in  the  Preface  :  )  hu 
^KcveUtions  a>id  Vifions :  His  Angehcal  Stone, 

€  XCV  P  2"!;  Kelly's  forwer  mifcarriage 
^  taken  notice  of:  the  caufe  of  it :  It  is  for- 
given. VoVxor  Dee,  6-c.  their  Ofjxce  wagnt- 
hd  Kingdom:  of  the  Earth  to  oe  deliroyed. 
]^xinx(^\ctii  relhred.  ChnU  to  R  eigne.  Other 
Prediaions,very  ihange,  (  but  not  tiue)^ai  the 
certain  year.  Rodolph.  Eniperour,  to  be  e^al- 
ted  Stephen  King  of  Poland,  to  be  dejtrojed. 
Enoch's  Tables.     Voaor  Dee  his  Prayer,  and 

Kelley's  Vow.  ^„     .       c  ■     i      . 

€  Vodors  Det's  Letter   to  Oftaviiis   Spmola,  fo 

^  iecommunkated  to  the  Emperour  ;  but  not  de- 
livered at  that  time,  by  reafon  of  t^e- Emperour 

his  abfence.  ,,         r  ■■    ■     ■    j 

m  XCVI  p*  235.  Ga.  Za.  Vaa  :  [pints  m\ited  : 
that  is,  called  upon  by  Do&or  Dee  .-   their  anfwer 
-   interpreted  by  him. 

€  r^/forw^r  Letter,/  with  fome  alterations  J  de- 
livered, and  the  Em^cronvs  very  frjactoui  anjwer 
to  it  by  thefaid  S^'inoh.  Do^ror  Curtzms, /r 
Tion'or  of  the  Laws,  one  of  the  Emperours  Pnvy 
Conncil  5  accounted  very  teamed  :  appointed 
'hythel.m\>cxiom  to  deal  with  Vocior  Dee,  in  hif 

#  XCVII  P    237.    T>o&or  Dee  askfth  counfell, 
^(of  God',    he  thought:  )  but  firji  encouHter- 

•^dke  it :')  and  hn  temptations.  Ed.  ft-elley 
very  Penitent  \hll,  but  defirous ,  (as  unfit  J  to 
■  heoHtof  his  Office.  The  fpirits  appear.  Kc- 
>>conciliation  ;  twofold  :  (  mth  God,  with  the 
Churdi,  &c.  Purgatory,  Ihe  body  of  Chrift, 
the  cafe  0/ Rodolph.  Emperoun  tn  cafe  he 
obey,  or-  difobey.  the  fpint  of  Choice  m 
Voa^r  Dee,  explained.     Voaor  Curtz  allowed 

C  V-    239-  P«^<"'  Curtz,  and  Doaor  Dee,  (  af- 

If^r    fome    Complements  by  Meffengers,}  r>teet. 

'^^heir  conference  of   fix  hours.      VoSior  Dee  s 

.^>>JiilatioH  of  himfelf  ,  his  Studies,^.;/  Suite  5 
t'r;and  therein,  though  not  appr  hended  by 
i;himfelf,  his  intoUeiable  frefumptton ,  pride, 
..-ibtri,  opinion  of  himfelf,  &c.  )      Revelations  , 

-i^oo\%,  and  wonder  full  confidence  5  as  of  mojt, 
^  that  are  fo  deluded. 

^   Ed.Kelley  Ifrangely  tempted. 

^  DoGor  Dee's  mUhuil  of  Vocior  Curtz,  upon 
what  grounds, 

^  XCVm  p.    240,    Lying;    and   froward  li- 

•  ,  tlence  ;  not  ordinarily  expounded.     Reconcilia- 
-■■•  tion  to  the  Church,     the  fin  againji  the  Holy 

-  Ghoft  :  what  it    is.     Complaints ,  and  trophe- 
'^fies  againji  the  Emperour,  and   Doctor  Curtz, 
becaiife  of  their  infidelity,  and  difobedience.    Do- 
ctor Dee  in  high  favour  :  England  given  to  him, 
■Mind   for  ^his  fake,    not    destroyed   :     let   the 
uCrown  there,  to  be   transferred,   &c.     Doaor 
.^£)eewarranted,  atidcoinmanded  to  write  to  the 
^^Emperour,  that  he  could  makj  the  Philofophers 
^St&Bc:   though,  yet,  be  could  not,  but  ispromifed 


ft^i  "arid  the  %\ft  of  healing.-  (  which  dtvct'Eh- 
thufialts  have  boafted  of;  and  if  they'have 
done  any  thing  really,  there  is  no  qiicftion 
but  they  have  done  it  by  the  help  offpirirs. 
How  fafe  therefore  it  is  to  gounto  fuch,  lee 
men  conlrder.  )  Ed.  Kelley  prayes  for  Doctor 
Curtz  hisfudden  death,  but  not  heard. 
^  XCIX  p.  243.  the  fame  Commiffion,here  again,' 
about  the  Philofophers  Stone  :  and  the  Empe- 
rour,^fr?  alfo  threatned  :  and  another  (  Erne- 
{kwi^  ajpgued  to  hit  place.  Reported  here  to  be 
poffeffedby  aVevil.  ' 

*  C  p.  244  Dodor  Dee,  comforted  and  c'oti^ 
firmed  by  his  fpirits  ,  agabijl  flanders,  andevill 
reports  :  out  of  Scripture,  &c.  ^  Jke  fpirits 
here,feem  to  allude  to  a  paffage  of  the  Sibyls 
Verfes,  (  a  counterfeit  Book^  '■  )  as  DoCior  Dee 
doth  obferve  at  laji,  to  agree  with  it.  they  tell' 
DoSir  Dee  he  fl^all  be  w'th  the  Emperour  in 
fpight  of  the  Devil  ;  (  fo  they  can  play  \ipon 
themfelves,  when  they  lift,  ro  fool  men;  )  but 
did  not  fay  true,  and  in  that  fifewed  themfelves 
very  Devils;  and  that  Vodor  Dee  might  have 
underjiood,  had  not  his  underiiandmg  beenfo  'blin~ 
ded  and  captivated  by  them. 

^  DoVior  Dee  invited  to  Dinner,  by  the  Spaaifh 
Embafladoiir ;  who,  among  other  things^  pro- 
feffeth  himfelf  to  be  defcended  of  Raymundus 
LuUius  :  that  this  Raym.  L.  (  if  we  may  be- 
lieve him  ^  by  a  retired  folitude,  without  Rookj  : 
(the  way  commended  by  the  late  Method  al- 
fo ;  but  indeed  the  moft  ready  way  to  put 
men  out  of  their  wits-  )  of  an  ignorant  illi- 
terate man,  became  very,  learned :  and  that  he 
f>.z^  t/Eie  philofophers  Stone  :  whereupon  he  doth 
conclude  and  build,  that  which  Dehor  Dee  re- 
lated of  himfelf,  his  vifions,  and  revelations,  &c. 
might  be  as  pojjible,  and  true,  the  EmperouriT 
by  him  commended. 

^  p.  246.  the  fecond  Letter,  written  by  Do^or 
Dee  to  the  Emperour.  His  confidence  as  great 
as  ever;  and  particularly  concerning  t/^e  Phi- 
lofophers  Stone,  which  he  doth  herepromifeto 

■  the  Emperour,  (  being  fo  perfwaded  by  his  fpi- 
rits, though  as  yet,  as  ignorant  of  it,  as  ever.  ) 

*  Do&or  Dee  at  Dinner  again  with  the  Spanifh 
EmbaflTadour. 

^  Ed.  Kelley  troublefdme  :  DoSor  Dee's  confi- 
dence in  God,  andgreat  penury. 

C   p.  247,  Dr.  Dee  vifited  by  Dr.  Cmtz,at  his  cwh 
houfe.His  CO  wplaints: Dr.Curtz  account  of  tb&  Em- 
perour (his  Majier')  prefent  apprehenfions  of  this< 
bufinefs:  Some  Mathematical  Books  writtenbyDr. 
Dee,and  Comniandinus  (^a  very  famous  man)U.c, 

€  p.  248.  ' Another  Letter  'of  DoSlor  Dee's  to  the 
Spanilh  Embaffadour.  His  wonder  full  ronfi-'t 
dence,  declining  (  wifely  :  his  fpirits  had  fo  in- 
ftrufted  iiira,  )  the  teji  of  humane  reafon.  (ro'-i" 
iUis,  for  mcntifi  to  be  cotreded,  here.')  ^  Att 
account,  (  in' a  Poftfcript  )  of  his  laji  conference 
with  Dr.  Cwvtz. 

^    CI  p.    249.   After  a  [welling  Preface  j{  fit- 
ted  for    the   Scene  ,  and  Auditours)  a  l.ngi 
difcourfe  (  upon  occafion    of    Dodor    Dee   bts 

-    Wife\  fickjtelfe  :  )    of  true    Phyiick  ,     and 
[^*  3")  the 


.»! 


delThfi.;  Table. 


'     {he   cUiifes  of  difeafes  :   much  f<i  vowing  (^whereof 
-V  mote  inttfe  Preface;)   of  Paracelfus  his  jlyle, 
and  fPirits.  ^Kare  Jittffy  ntoji  part  o/^»  for  a 
■Quack.   •  '     ,      .     ,  ' 

^  ClI  p.  252.  cm  p.  253.  7he  fame  matter  pro- 
»"  Jeciite^,  and  particularly  applyed  to  Jane  Dee, 
i*"-.  (  the  wife  of-  Dr.  Dee,  )  her  jrefent  cafe  :  '  Her 
«^"    Difeafe:    aKdxheKemtAy.  ^ 

'.'<r    CIV   p.    253.     Do T: or  Dee  reproved^  ^s  not 
fenfrile   enough  of  fohat   God  had  done  for  him  : 
"<•'    which  is  fcmpoufly  fet    »nt  by   the  Spirits.    Mo- 
V   'Key  not  to  be  expeded  from  thefe    fpirits  ^  who 
■i^<-\ffievertheleffe  promifed  them  (after  a  while)  great 
'^'''^  'plenty  of  all  things  :  poffer  xo  make,  and  marre, 
■''''■'    fchtm  they  pleafe,  &c.    Ed.  Kellcy  reproved  for 
co»trivins.  how  to  jieal  away  :  Al-  JLaskj^  ';fo  fre- 
*^'^vail  againji  hit  enemies. 
^  Jnother meeting 0 f  Dodcor  Cnrtz,   atrdlDcStot 
Dee's.     The  Emperours  Anfwer  ,  (byDofXot 
Curtz  )  to  fame  faff  ages  of  Doftor  Dee's  mef- 
fagey  delivered  unto  him,  as  from  God.     Doftor 
Det  doth  interpret  hintfelf.     Accepts    of  the  Em- 
ferours  profer,  to  do  him  good,  &c.     ^  Dr. 
^'VCwrtZrfw^   DoCtor  DtCy  together  again  :     but 
''"  'Wo  accojmt  ofhU  two  Letters  to  the  Eniperourjff 
^'    given.     Mathematical    iKventiom  y    of   DoBor 
"«''   Curtz,  e^r.      ^   A  draught  for  a.  Pafle,  to  be 
"  '•  bhtainedofthe  Emperoiir  for  BcHor  Dec,  &c. 
VoUor  Dee  takes  notice  of  the  refpe&s  of  two 
(f' i,c,^pani(h  Enjbaffadours,  and  another  great  Man, 
Vi^     dvne  to  him  pablickjy.     ^  The  account  of  fonie 
-\s^  two  woneths,  front  ^  Oftob.  1584.  toDeGemb.20. 
V      nreifanting.  • 

"?/€  p.  ^')^.JheJrfecond  arrival  to  Prage.     VoUor 

Dee's  Letter  to  the  Spanifli  Embafradour  ;  Hit 

v^c■~  rtonderful  progreffe^  as  he  thought  )  in  high  wy- 

,r>''"(fteries  and  revelatioks^  &c.  '  ■^'<-^''- 

zz%.Hishoufe  there.     ^  p.  354.P«'c7or  Dtth  Letter 

tc  De^or  Curtz  ;  (  one  of  the  Eraperours  privy 

Council,  &c.  as  before,')  Complaint  of  afperfions, 

V^,   (  3t  minis  :     net  nimis,    as  printed:   )  Tro- 

.„  .feffton    of    good  intent  ions  towards    the  Empe- 

.^'6v   p.  35'>.  C  li   ^61.  )    Long  parabolical, 

,j,    tenigmatical  Apparitions  i    (  which  DoUor  Dec 

'    ■   did  not  likp  very  well,  «or  underfrand',  as  ap- 

pearetbby  p.  ■^61.')   and  fome  wild  Doctrines,  of 

the  fear  of  the  Lord;  innocency,  fanftifica- 

tiou  in  Chrift,  &c.  cabalilHcally  fet  out.     the 

Philofophcrs  Stone,  ^row/piii  to  the  Emperour  by 

VoUor  Dee. 

•'^i^  CVI  p.  361.  Gods  myfteries  not  tohe  difpenced 

''"'°^'  hut  by  degrees,  &c.  The  Philofophers  Stone,  a 

j^  gfeatmyjiery. 

'Mif  CVII    p.   362.  A    Trogreffe  in   the   Corbale. 
V*  •  OppofttioH  as  before.    The  LefTon  (fee  p.  387.  ) 


but  of  the  Book  oFEnoch. 


.,      *vv    ...^j.^,  ..^   'J        -^    —  ---0     ^V-      -        :» 

'  ^    and  fome  kjnd  of  expofition  of  it :  but  as  Ed. 
**"  ,'Kelley,   rightly  judged,  ignotiim  per  ignotius. 
V''  Jih'eyence  Hquired.  .  Beilor  Dec  ^».«i  fr^^und. 
'An  iiiufton,  {fo  pretended.).  \  '''J','-   li-    ijr 
^^.eXtH  j?^;3^7.  Poaor  I^e^^^.,5^^^«- 


gainft,  as  unworthy,    becaufe  of  their  finst    and 

unthankjulneffe,  for  fo  many  mercies.     Anothtrt 

f^whomfoeverDohor  Dee  would  chufe)  ufoncer- 

iaiyt  cautions  and  conditions,  to  be  fubflituted  in 

Ed.  Kelley's /'/<zt"e.     Dodor   Dee's  forrow,  and 

humble  requeil  about  the    Philofophers  Stone. 

H^  deftre  to  be  tnflruHed  (  by  hit  fpirits  )  aimt 

the  Sacrament  of  the  Lords  Supper.    The  jSy- 

ftery  of  it  cabaliftically  unfolded.    The  Trinity, 

Adam's  fall,  Chrifs   Incarnation.     The  D»- 

^nweo/Tranfubftantiation;  Of  receiving  Mt\- 

deronc  kind  ;  Of  adoration  of  the  Eucharift  : 

But  receiving  of  it,  not  allowed. 

•  CXlV  p.   373.  Ihe  former  BfilJrine  highly  mag' 

-  nified  :    as  alfo  the  LefTon  ,  in  Chjmical  gxh^ 

brilh,  0/ multiplication,  dlgnification,  &c. 
C  CX V    ibid ,      More    of  their    vnworthineffe , 
(  through  fin)  and  inc  apacity,  for  fuch  high  things. 
Vocior  Dee  pray eth.   Al.    Lasky  rejeSed.  DetSor 
Dee  much  troubled.  *^ '  . 

^  CXVI  p.  375.  Vo&orDee  very  earnefiforthe 
fecret  of  the  Philofophers  Stone,  fo  often  pro- 
vtifed  :  but  eluded  with  Sermon-like  fluff  of  re- 
proof :   of  patience,affliSions  ;  worr^ partaking  5 
Confcflion,  &c. 
^  CXVll  p.  378.   Do^or  Dee  bimfelf  henrctK 
and  feeleth.       More  reproofes.    T>e3or  Det  to 
prevail  againft  bif   enemies  :    but    commanded 
fpeedily  to  go  for  Prague,  to  prevent  imprifon- 
ment,  &c. 
^  CXVIII  p.  379.  Here  ttgain^  ba^emdto  he 
•    gone.  A\.h.  hit  cafe.  1  K^vfe^oX 

^  CXIX  ibid.  They  begin  their  jeurnty^SuPbJfkH 
Apparition  intheway,  after  fome  goodly  premi'- 
fes  made  to  HoQor  Dee,  for  hit  obedience  .'  uni 
TrediHions  (  all  falfe )  of  judgements  upon  the 
Emperour,  and  exaltation  ef  Stephen  King  of 
Poland,  &c.  they  are  commanded  to  return  back, 
again,  and  to  return  to  Prague.      ^  fFhich  doney 
T)o£ior  Dec's  Child  it  chrilhned,fomeofthechief- 
eii  in  the  Emperours  Court  being  GodfatherSj««<i 
Godmothers. 
^  CXX  p.  382.    The  Prophets  of  old  times  fum- 
tnoned  :  why  viiited,  &c.  The  eternal  generation 
of  Chrift,  the  Son  of  God,  Platonically  fet  tut. 
Divine  Neceflity,  the  caufe  of  all  thingt  r  Ele- 
ction;  Perfeverance,  &c,     Earneii.  exptjlula' 
ti'Hs,  and    exhortations.     Chrilt    again:    The 
Church  Militant,  and  TriumpboHt.    T>oScr  Dee 
andEd,  Kelley  much  taken  with  this  goodly  jivffy 
and  confirmed  in  their  Errour.yj!^$J  .l//\o 
^  p.  3S7.  The  pretious  LefTon,   before  fpvi^  of, 
of  revealing    the    fecret    of  the   Philofophers 
Stone.  .jT.,  rfvi;((fTiiiic  _■  '  h  iWv*  ^ 

f  CXXl  p.   388.  T**  Leffbn,  mA.foWf.ohfcye 
words  of  it,  exprtffed  in  Englijh.     Ed.-.K-dley, 
,,  .  defroM  to  be  rid  of  hi)  office.    .    \   M  x-'iV^   '• 
f^  CXXII    p.   389.    Jane    Dee  (  2>«5?of  fiee's 
wif^  )  bet  earneji  and  humble  Petition, <t»>  60^, 
,  ^  (  fo  the  pool-  woman  thought  )  and  his  Angelsy 
\.:  for  rehtf  in  her   great  neceffity,    xThs  Petition 
,,   anfwer ed ,  firji  with  reproof  i  hut   covtmenda- 
.:    Skn,  and  pro  mifes,  afterwards.  ■  The.  fpirhson- 
feffeth,  he  had  no  power  to  proeVte,  them  .mi)key  : 
'^^^^^hut.J^IJ:ead  ^ef  it  5  pretends  to.  give  tbem^.^od 

eounfel. 


.^WrThe^Tabk 


^'^^c&unfe!,  to  get  out  o'^  Prage  fpeeJily,  &C. 
t^' yi' fiecord  of  a  hot  conpiH  between  VoHorDcey 
-^'ind  Ed,  Keiley,    abont  fame  Magical  papers  : 
«•  ^»»  which  cenfiilt  Dodor   t,tee  thought  birttfe/f  in 
i>«'  danger  of  hit  life,  and  was  fame  to  cry  out  for 

kelp. 
•|fpXXlII  p.  391.    An  JpparitijH  fitted  for  the 
■Q^cafm!.    lb:  fault  of  td.    Kellsy*s  rc/r^flon- 
K[n(ffc^  laid  upon  thi  tmlice  and  envy  of  t^i?  Devil, 
*'"' and    fame  places  of  Efdras ,   applied    to    that 
'^'.'ttrrpofe  >     Ed.    Kelley   rebukjd  ;     but  cornfor- 
'  ted  and  co'tfinned  with   a.   promfe   of    no   evil 
Cpirit  to  befijfered  to  trouble  him  henceforth  :  and 
■^^'^jytany  good  exhortations  :  vFith  a  Parable  <z//()  to 
^    -'that   pwpofe.      If   Some     guejiions  propofed    by 
T>oUor  Dee,    who'  is  referred  to    the  Book  of 
Enoch 

,  f  .pXXlV   p.  395.  lienor  Dec,  &c.    jharply 

reproved  for    not    fnlfiVing  the   command  of  a. 

fpeedydj^arture^withm^re  expedition.    He  ac- 

^^.y^^owledgeth  C convicted  by  fame  pUuftble  conff 

.  derations,  )  hit  faulty    and    prayeth  fervent- 

<f  CXXV   p.  396.  T'heStont  Ihnt  up  for  twenty 
Jind-*yes.     7 heir  journey  ^ /row  PraJ^c,  to  Craco- 
v\  j-Tia  .•  )  and  in  thevay^  ftrange  ychirlewrnds.  Some 
r--k:iirife  about  their   houfe.  Al.  Laskjr,    i,y  whom 
w'jVoGor  Dee  ii  brought  to   the  King  :  (  fufHnem, 
for  fiftereni,    to  he  corre&ed.  Sec.  )  delvers  hit 
CommijJioMy  &c.  He  receives  the  Communion  .- 
fo  doth  Ed.  Kelley. 
ii^rf^f  CXXVI  p.  398.    The  Kings  prefence  required 
-vT'tB?  fpirits,  at  thefe  Apparitions. 
isJJ  CXXVlI   ibid.   Si<perji,tiom  frajers  (by  ap- 
-sit  fointment  of  fpirits  )  to  the.  Angels,  Govemours 
^Q  yofKingdoms  and  Nations^     Stephen  (  King  of 
^iTi'iPoland )  greatly  in  favour  (  wth  G.d )  and  to 
:i»Me-tbe  MinHier  of  great  thi'igs. 
^iCorDee  doth  apprehend^  (  which  Ke'Iey  doth  of- 
\,\^:  tenftofcffe  to  have  found  inhimfelf)  that  the  fpi^ 

rits  kjiew  hit  thoughts. 
-lip,  Ed;  Kelley,  very  unquiet,  and  hlafphemo'it :  Tet 
m'V^onfirmed  again,  by  fame  ^-apparitions  ;  to  Dodor 
,«>jD,Se's  great  comfort,  vho  iHll  (  very  devoutly 
^3l3and  innocently,  had  not  he  brought  this  grie- 
-s»VnVoi!sdelufion  upon  himfelf,  by  tempting  God 
.  "^' fo  grievoufly' :  )  istfc  ful'init  untu,  and  comfort 

'\hmfelf  in  Gtd. 

/jf'lQXXVni  p.  400.     Apparitions  in  the  pre  fence 

of  A\.  Lasky.     Fromifts  to  VoCror  Dec,  an  I  to 

Xi«g  Stephen.      Al,  Lasky  upon  con-liti  ns  to  be 

i-  received  tnto  favour  again.    ^   D(3dT;r  Dee  re- 

'^eives  the  Communicn  again. 

y^  CXXIX  p.  401.  Apparitions  at  the   Cttrt  of 

,  (; ;  the  King  of  Poland,i«  the  prefence  of  Al.  Lasky, 

(^  one  of  the  Princes  Palatine  of  th  Country  )•  who 

2*% 'it  offered  by  the  fpirits,  fudden  delirudion   of  the 

^'^tHg,  (  if  hedeftreit,  )  or  to  fee  km  liruck^with 

fly.fieprofie  ;  or  otherwife  corr tiled,    if  fo    rather. 

no;Afc  Lasky  bit  pious  and  religious  anfwer,   and 

'■ii^ehoice  :  for  which  he  if  commended.      7ke  fpirits 

•Ynwill  not  endure,   though  re quejled,  to  deal  With  the 

.  vKing,  in  the  Hungarian  Tofigt^e.    They  promife  to 

.>5^f«4te  him  in  Latine.      A  good  bleftngy  and 


formatl  abfolntion ,     pronounced   by  evill  fpi- 
rits. 

^  CXXX  p.  402.  f  Dodor  Dee,  &c.  bre'ght 
to  Sicp  len,  (  King  e/ Poland,  )  who  upon  fonte 
conditions^  it  willing  to  be  prefent  :  yet  wal{es  an 
obje^iinn  out  of  Scripcure,  as  not  fully  fatisfied 
thut  thefe  apjiaririons,  &c.  were  from  God.  To 
whi'h  Dod 'r  Dee  makes  an  accurat  anfwer  :  (by 
whicii  it  doch  appear,  that'cither  he  had  flu- 
died  the  ca!e  ^ery  well,  or  was  helped  as  o- 
ther  reilltnthuliafts,  by  his  fpirits  :)  bat  very 
full  of  fa'lti  in  the  Lo[>y,  and  jo  printed.  More 
here,  I  think^^  then  tn  all  the  Latine  of  the 
Bo'>k  befides.  We  tuk^  notice  of  it  in  the 
r  rraca. 

^  Before  the  Aftion,  a  fervent  Prayer  of  Doittr 
Dee*s,  of  /&«  catling,  revelations,  Al,  Laskic, 
King  Stephen,  &c, 

0  In  the  Aftion,  or  Apparition,  King  Stephen, 
'  jharply  reprajied  for  hit  yns.  B'it  upon  condition 
of  repentance,  and  fubmifji in  to  God  (i»  thitwjy') 
the  Kine,sefthe  earth  (  inroxticati  calice  Mc- 
recricis  :  a  phrafe ■  ften  ufed  in  this  B-ok^:  thit 
if  drunk  with  the  cup  of  the  Whore,)  are  to  do 
homage  unto  him  \  and  he,  (right  Anabapti(rne,) 
to  work^  firange  execution,  &c.  Very  Ufty  lan- 
guage ,  here  ufed  :  Fige  pedem  in  Aquil . 
&c. 

^  XXXI  p.  406.  SadcompJtainty(_asiromGod) 
of  incredulity :  The  Incarnation  of  Cbri'.i,  avd 
thereby  priviledge  o/Chriftians  above  the  Ifraci- 
its.  Tears.  T)o^orDee,fent  with  ait  erra-^  I  to 
King  Stephen  :  and  a.  direVt  promife,  and  fiofer 
of  the  Philofophers  '■tone. 

^  Docior  Dee  delivers  his  errand  in  Latin  :  (  but 
here  our  records,  I  know  not  by  ^vhac  chance, 
are  very  defeftive.  King  Stephen,  it  feeras 
did  not  prove  fo  credulous  ,  as  was  cjc 
pefted.  ) 

^  CXXXII  p.  408  The  fpirits  are  angrj  ^  and 
command  all  to  he  (hut  up,  for  afeafon,  itll  fur- 
ther order.  (  the  account  of  fome  moncrhs  is 
wanting.  J 

^  C  XXXIII  p.  409.  The  power  of  God.  The 
Jewes,  (tW  Jerufalem  tflif  reiored.  Andnow^ 
one  Fi  ancis  Puccius  (  a  Florentine,  a  zeaUut 
and  learned  Tapiii,  )  being  entertained,  and  o-d- 
witted  IB  thefe  ftCTtt.%  :  with  great  hopes  of  fome 
good  to  be  done  by  this  feilowdup :  Rome  a  T)  be- 
ing defigned  henceforth  for  the  Scene:  (  ^"f  p. 
417.)  the  fpirits  apply  themfelves,  and  fit  'heir 
fpeech  to  this  end  and  occafien.  The  interpreta- 
tion of  Scriptures  The  Fathers.  The  Church. 
Luther  tf«/i  Calvin,  conder»ned.  The  P(>>e  of 
Rome,  cannot  be  (Jaj  thefp'rits)  the  Anrittinft . 
and  think^tbey  prove  it.  Exhortations  to  rtturn 
to  the  Church  :  and  a  form  of  Prayer,  or  Thank}' 
giving,  to  that  purpofe.  In  the  conc''  fion,  'he 
fpirits  apply  themfelves  to  Puccius,  perfonal'y  : 
He  it  to  rebuk^e  the  prefent  Pop  ,  (^h^re  cdiled, 
i  wicked  Monfter,  )  again,t  whom^  if  hewi'l  not 
beperfwaded,  terrible  judgements  are  den-tuncei. 
<j"  The  fame  hSC\on  {beeaufe  the  fpirits  here 
rathet  chofe  to  fpieak^ErigliJhj  than  Latine :  ffhere- 


The  Table, 


»ffontewhat  u  [aid  in  the  Prddce  :  inLatmehy 
DOor  Dee. 
^'  CXXXJV  p.    417.     "fhe  fiirntne    of  Francis 

•  Puccius  his  cowMifton,  in hisji  Language.  Future 
i\ftions,  in  Rome.  ^  But  here  foUoyfeth  it 
hiatus  of  fome  6  vnneths  :  which  bereaves  us  of 
vniny  particulars.  In  the  meaji  time  happened 
the  ftiitence  of  baiiifhtiiait  againji  DoCf.r  Dee, 
l>y  the  Tupes  vndiation  and  authority  5  (  as  his 
Niincio,4>.  j^:^j^.^d-th  acktiewledge  )  andfo  brakf 
the  purpofe  of  going  to  Rome  ;  though  much  dri- 
ven on  !yy  Puccius,  &c.  as  will  appear. 

^  p.  418.  Vaffor  Dcei's  record  of  a  ftrange  thing, 
(  a  very  niiiaclej  in  his  jungtment^  )  that  hapned 
in  hii  presence,  and  fight  j  to  wit,  Bool{s  that  had 
been  burned  Ly  him,  (or  in  his  fight  )  reflored  un- 
to him  whoie  and  entire,  by  [pints .,  ice. 

^  CXXXV  p.  419  Frince  Rofimberg  {you 
may  fee  hit  Titles  p.  415.  )  called,  and  admit- 
ted into  the  Society,  to  be  partak^er  of  the  My- 
fteiies  ;  and  the  Executioner  of  (^fofuppofed  ) 
Gods  pidgentents,  &c.  ^  Prince  Rofimberg, 
upo^  relation  of  what  had  b-en  revealed,  con- 
cerning himf  elf,  accepts  ef  it  thankfully  :  promi- 
fes  amendment,  and  prajes  for  the  Emperour, 

;  (w%ofe  Vice-Roy  he  Wtn in  Eohemia,  &c;,')  that 
he  may  not  be  dejiroyed,  but  repent  rather. 

^  p.  421.  A  Letter  ef  hit  (with  hii  own  hand')  to 
T>odor  Ded,  to  the  fame  pnrpofe. 

^  VoUor  Dte\Jo'^rney  to  Leiplig.  ^  His  Letter 
/i.S'ir  Francis  Walfingliam,  Secretary  to  §ueen 
-Elizabeth:  wherein  is  obfervable  his  wonderfull 
confidence;  andvain  boafting,  (^thovgh  not  with- 
out [ome  gruunds  :  )  its  a  very  Enthufiaft,  and  de- 
luded wan  :  thojtgh  it  cannot  be  denied,that  fame 
EntlmfiMs,  upon  leffe  grounds,  (  when  God  hath 
been  pleafed  to  give  way  )  have  had  far  better 

•If  "p.'  4I4.  One)n\.  Afcanius,  his  Letter  to  Do&or 
Dee,  informing  him  of  fame  reports, and  attempts 
agamji  him  iff  Germany ,  as  a  Necromancer, 
&c.  '■■     .'   "'  ■■■ 

^  p.  42;.  A  Letter  of  Vo&er  Dee's  to  Prince 
Rofimberg,  complaining  of  thofe  reports,and  at- 
tempts,by  the  Nuncio,  &c. 

<J  ^16.  Another,  to  t^e  Emperour,  of  the  fame 
fubjed. 

^  7hefentence  of  Baniflinient  againji  Do&or  Dee, 
&c.  in  the  German  "Tongue. 

^  p.  429*  Prince  Rofimberg /jif  cjueflions  and  pe- 
titions ,  miractilonfly  (  as  w'<m  conceived  )  an- 
fwered.  A  white  paper  being  fet  jtpon  the  Altar, 
whileji  Mafle  ws  [aid :  the  faid  paper  after 
Mafle,  was  found  all  written,  tijtd  as  foon  as  copied 
cut,  all  the  Letters  of  itvanifljed.  A  Copy  of  the 
[aid  paper,  or  (miraculous J  writting. 

*  ibid.   Some  ohfervations   of  Vedor  Dee's,  upon 
'""  'Francis  Puccius  (of  whom  before)  his  carriage  ; 

yf  hereby  it  did  appear  unto  him,that  the  faid  Puc- 
cius did  not  deal  truely  and  fincerely :  which 
treub!cdDocIorDee,who  much  defirtd  to  be  rid 
ofhiifi.  ' 


^  p,  430.    A  conflici  of  his,  with  the  faid  lH'uccius, 
about  their  going  to  Rome,  &c. 

^  p.  451.  A  Paper  delivered  by  Pncc'ms,  to  Do-  \ 
c?or  Dee,  <«/r^w!t^f  Nuncio;  by  which  they  areff. 
abfolvedfrom  all  crimes,  (were  they  never  fo  great^P^ 
and  hainom")  fo  they  will  gs  to  Rome.     Pucciu|iC* 
his  inconjianry  about  that  Paper.    ^  Docior  Dee's* 
Letter  to  the  faid  Nuncio  ,   upon  that  occafion  : 
wherein,  aj7iong  other  things,   to  tellhimofthefe 
Bookj  that  had  been  burned,  and  were   (miracu- 
louflj)  rejhred  ;  and  of  many  more  burned  (pare 
of  thefe  Records  certainly  )  not  yet  rel}ored,but 
promifed  and  expeaed.     4{  The  faid  Letter  af- 
ter fame  contejl  about  it,  committed  to  Puccius,  to 

.  be  carried  and  delivered.  ^  More  of  Puccius 
his  not  faithful  dealing.  Sfme  Herefies  alfo  of 
his.  Some  other  things,  laid  to  hit  charge  by  Do- 
Uor  Dee, 

^  p.  454.  ThePopesNnncmi,  his  anfwer  toVo- 
dor  Dee  :  grave,  and  courteous.  (  At  the  begin- 
ning of  it,  aut,  for  auttm  to  be  correcitH) 

^  p.  435.  A  Paper,  (here  infcnbed  andfiiled, 
Oraculum  Divinum  )  in  Kelly's  abfence,  writ- 
ten and  delivered  (  as  Vodor  Dee  doth  here  re- 
cord :  )  by  fpiritual  and  divine  means  ;  the 
drift  whereof  is,  to  confirm  Prince  Roiimber", - 
At  whofe  requeft,  the  fentence  of  banifiiment^ 
mitigated. 

^  p.  43(S.  A  long  and  f/tbynifjtve  Letter  0/ Fran- 
cis Puccius,  to  Doaor  Dee,  &c.  where,  among 
other  things,  he  gives  him  a  very  punfffsal  account 
ofwhathadpaffed,  in  dtfcovrfe,  between  the  Popes 
Nuncias,  and  himfelf,  concerning  their  caufe, 
apparitions,  high  attempts.  Sec.  (iveli  worth  the 
reading.  J  His  encounter  with  a  Jefuit,  before 
the  faid  Nuncio.  Jf'hat  account  Prince  R.olim- 
berg ,  and  fome  other  great  men,  inade  of 
them. 

^  p.  444-  Kelley,  to  Do^or  Dee ;  Do^or  Dce,n 
to  his  Wife  ;  but  nothing  confiderable  in  ei- ' 
ther.  " 

^   CXXXVI  p.   444.   f  CXXXVII    P..445. 
Apparitions  in  the  Stone,  (  after  6  monetls   in- 
ter miffion')  renewed,  with  exprefjions  of  great  de^' 
TOtion,  in  Dorior  Dee  :    but  with  many  Woes  and 
threatnings,  by    t^f  fpirits  :    who  neverthelcffe',^ 
Prince  Rofimberg  being  prefent,  promife  fair  ta 

him,  and  give  him  fome  injirucfionsy  how  to  ca^ry>} 
himfelf.  -  :    ^ 

^  Francis  Puccius  very  trouhlefome ;  but  at  laji 
cjuieted  with  the  reliitution  (  VoSor  Dee,  at  this 
time,  abounded  with  money,  2000  Ducats  in  one 
hag  :  Prince  Rofimberg  had  a  good  purfef) 
of  800,  Florens  .-  which  the  ^aid  Puccius 
had  formerly  contributed  for  the  fcrvice. 

f  CXXXVllI  p.  448.  Poeior  Dee  tnakei  bold 
to  fropofe  fome  quejiions  (  tending  to  the  fe^ 
cret  of  the  Philofophers  Stone  ;  asltdl^e  it  .*  ) 
out  of  feafon ;  but  is  rejeded,  dnd  doth  humbly 
fnbmit.  v.- 


The 


jrft 


THE   CONTENT 

OFTHE 

SECOND     PART. 


'it' 


*1WS  \>    . 


Part  II. 

Action  I.p.  I.  Sermon-like  (luf  :  Vo&or  Dee 
C  having  a  zeal,  but  not  according  to 
tiiowledge  )  mervailoiifly  affiled  with  it. 
Prince  Rofiniberg  his  expectation  of  money 
anf^rered)  and  eluded  with  great  fvbtilrj^  by  ex- 
ample out  of  Scriptvrty  of  Abraliam,  David, 
Solomon,  &c.  Ih?  precious  Powder  he  had,  how 
and  when,  to  le  tifed.  Judgements  to  be  exe- 
cuted upon  feveral  Great  ones,  (  fure  enough 
if  they  had  prevailed  )  by  Prime  Roliniberg,  as 
from  God.  Ed.  Kelley,  hit  Wife  banen  :  why. 
He  very  weary  of  hit  office  :  reproved  for  it^  and 
another  (  Arthur,  Puc/or  Dee's  fon,  )  to  be  fub- 
jiiTuted  in  hlf  place  :  yea,  and  hit  portion  of  the 
precious  Powder  to  be  tak^en  from  him.,  if  he  do 
not  repent. 

Iltp.  4.  ArthvT,  firfi  prefented,  and  prepared  by 
Pra.yer,&c.  enters  upon  his  Office  :  Seeth  divers 
things  in  the  Scone ;  Lions,  Men,  &c,  but  hear- 
ethnot. 

ill#p.  5.  kn\mv  againi  as  before  :  Three  Exer- 
cises in  one  day. 
IV^rp. .  7.  Arthur  again^  as  before  :  in  two  Exer- 
.^^ifes  more. 

V,  p.  8.  Ed.  Kdhy;inhif  Office  again  :  fees  and 
hears,  M  before.  Uric],  firji  authour  of  Doifor 
Pec's  <j«i  Ed.  Kelicy's  coiijunftion,  A  New. 
Liw  prom  fei  here  again.  Anabapt'ftical  Vo- 
Urineof  committing  Adultcry,ror  Godsfal{e,Scc, 
^  Offome  words  here,  fee  the  'Errata. 

VI,  p.  9.  Here  the  fpirits  begtH  to  Jhew  themfelves 
in  their  own  lik^eneffc  apparently  ,   teaching  do- 

.iTfriHes  of  Devils  :  a/id  yet  jiill  (  as  their  injiru- 
vtents  at  this  day  in  divers  places  )  in  the  name 
of  God.  Voit'jr  Dee  and  Ed.  Kelley,  are  ex- 
^horted,  yea  commanded,  to  have  their  ](Vivss  in 
common.  Ih,-  cafe  argued  on  both  fdefjh'fly  and 
eagerly.  Other  lirangeVedrineofI)evits,Qtotedy 
and  reje&ed  in  f/x?  Preface  ^  0/ murder  condem- 
ned by  the  Laws  of  men,  approved  by  God.  Saint 
Paul  inipiouffy  flandered.  Great  promjfes  ,  in 
cafe  of  obedience.    7he  Powder.     The  Pope  here 


accurfed  :  yetVo\-<ci-y  elfewhen piflified.  Kelley 
fcandaiized  :  Boiler  Dee  in  great  Agony,  Some 
/ifcret^  0/ diftillation    revealed  by   fpirits.   The 
Pov/dev  again,  and  how    K.  K.  came  by  it.    Pre- 
dicfions  of  England,  &c.   (all  falfe  and  foolifh) 
Ed.  Kdky  his  fidelity  fiifpeae-l.      Cabaliftieal 
myjieries  of  Letters,  and  Numbers  :    not  well  un~ 
derfiood  bj  jDoaor  Dee,  &c.  though   much  helped 
by  his  fpirits.    Bat  at  iajf,  he  hath  joy,  ( in  fpirit 
as  be  is perfwaded  )  and  refolvrs  to  obey, 
^  Dodur  Dee,  Ed.  Kelley,  and  their  two  Wives, 
their  fenfe,  apprehenfions,  and refoli'tions,concern- 
ing  this  new  docliine  of  promifcuoits  copulrtion  en- 
joy ned:    exprejfed  in  form  of  a  CowcivJdit  (^foby 
them  called)  wkh  God  :  here  firjt  exhibited,and 
afterwards,  p.  20.  compleatcd,und  fnifcribedby 
theP amies:     ^  with  a  imjl  wicked  dzui^c,  or 
conclufion,  o|^  dreadful  imprecations  to  all  that 
Jhould  hereafter  cme   to  the  k.n  owl  edge  of  it,  or 
bring  it  tokjiowledge  :    whereas  it  is  much  to  the 
glory  of  God,  and  true  Religion,  that  fuch  myjhries 
of  Hell  and  darl^neffe,  jhoidd  come  to  light,  to  be 
abhtrred  by  all  men  :   and    that   others    way  be 
warned  by  fiich  fad  examples,   not  to  hunt  after 
new   doftrines,  ««i  pretended  infprationsund 
revelations. 
^  p.  17,  Ed.  Kelley /j«  Declaration  f/i?>«  <^//7ii^(?, 
from  the  beginning  of  thefe  Aftions,   i-i  gtnerall: 
Ws  opbofniontipon  oQC^jipn.,;   H;>  diflike  of  this 
}tew  dodrine  ( in  p articular' )  as  contrary  to  the 
revealed  Will  sfGod  :  lioyc  fatisfjed  in  fame  nua- 
fure  :   and  thereupon  hi^  readimff?  to  «hi'y,  ,^ut 
upon  f he  wemens  profeffed.  di^fli^e,  and  dei/i/irr^, 
refohcs  to  give  over  all  further  de^ili^g. 
Vn,p.   \^.   Apparitions.     Tfje  chief 'itone  car' 
rjed  away  by  fpirits   in  t'heir  fight.    More  rxherr- 
tat  ions  and  arguments,  for  compliance  to  thU  ijcw 
doftrine.      Offer  of  aUir'itcle,  for  farther  con- 
firmation. 
Vill^  p.   21.  Another    Apparition  (  upon  .reqttejl 
made)  to  confirm  them  in  their  pnrpofe  of  obe- 
dience. 

IXjjp.  ^2.  Xet  another  to  the fanie  purpofe.  The 
Covenant  torne'by  Kelley,  m'ade  whole  again  by 
•fptritB.  The  great p,ower  of  &td:  faith  <r;7«i  obe- 

dieitcej' 


•.\, 


The  Table, 


d'lence,  the  yHtriH  thing.  Great  frovrifes.  Judge- 
■inenis  prontWiced  againfl  Kelley  his  tearing  the 
paper  of  Covcmnt,  Againjf  others.)  (fowe  al- 
readj  exi'Ciited)  f.r  enticinz^hint  away  :  Bjwh'ich 
It  feems  Kclley  bein;:,  terrified,  refolves  to  tarry, 
and  obey.     ^   The  Stone,  jimngely  takjK  away, 

Y'^  ''-ritngfly  reliored,  in  the  p-ffence  and  fight  of 

•■\-bnth. 

X  The  An  c/  obedience  (  good  words,  to  coiin- 
■ -'tcnance  greatell  villanies,  never  wanted:    as 

*'  diiylyfccn  :  )  performed,   ;V  accepted   by  f}:ews 

"  and  fpecckes.     Com-vendation  of  I'l'ifdom.  Secre- 

^)^''-iy  enjojued^ 

Xi  CabaliiVical  Doarirte,of  the  Creation  tfman  : 
The  foul  of  nian^  not  the  fiibjed  of  fitnBiftcatio>i, 
&c.  Great  Frotnifes  and  Preditlious  :  (  e(jua!/y 
true  )  entertained,  (  with  the  VoUrine  :  )  with 
comfort- 

^  p.  28.  Trince  Rofimberg  :  (  the  wan  now  in 
favour  :  but  miferably  abufed  and  deluded:")  two 
Letters  of  his  to  Poflor  Dee,  8cc.  Several que- 
ftimisby  him  fropcfed,  as  expeSing great  things  ; 
and  wholly  to  be  governed  by  their  fpirits.  His 
confidence  of  a  great  Trcafure,  in  the  Powder 
delivered  unto  him. 

^  p.    30.  Several  ^ejiions,  aud  Petitions  of  Po- 


cior  Dee's  upon  the  former  Propofnion,  8cc.  to  be. 
offered  unto  God :  among  the  refl,  one  for  ihe 
fffakjng  of  the  Philofophers  Stone.-    Another, 

for  Kelley's  being  fick^:  for  hit  JFife,  being  bar- 
ren :  for  his  own  IFife  fi:\,  &c.  The  Empe- 
perour  of  Mofcovie, /^wgrfaf  opinion  of  DoQor 
Dec,  and  favour  offered. 

\  But  here  followeth  that  great  hiatus,  or  inter- 
ruption of  Story,  which  bereaves  us  of  many  years 
(  fpol{en  of  in  the  Preface  ;  )  account.  All  from 
hence,  to  the  end,  fet  out  unto  m  but  the  fad  and 
lamentable  C.itaftrophie  of  this  long  Dclufion. 
Kellcy  is  no  more  heard  of  »ow  ;  yet  the 
fpirits  appear  jiill  in  the  fatnp  Jhape ,  as  be- 
fore. 


^  An,  Dom,  1607.  (  Stylo  Jul.)  Martii  20. 
By  this  time  VoTior  Dee  was  become  a  very  old  man  : 
If  he  we.e  bexagenarius  (  m  he  is  filled  in  Puc- 
c'ms  his  Letter,?.  I.  439. 1.  15.  )  a,  d.  1586.  he 
mult  needs  be  fourfcore  and  upwards  by  this  : 
But  we  need  not  taJ{e  the  wordfo  precifely  :  How- 
ever if  towards  it  then,  (^more  or  lejfe)  he  tnujl 
be  very  old  now,  m  I  faid  before. 


SJf.  ■'%*•?  ^f  tests' 

''\^*j^    '\jA^^    *ui*l*    '■\^w^ 


^^^^ 


#-»  #>  4r  4^  4b  4>  «#»  ^ 


"^ 


T 


i 


E   CONTENT  S.^i 

OFTHE 

THIRD    PART. 


Part  in. 

Action  I,p.  32.  Raphael  (  pretended)  fent 
unto  VoHor  Dee,  to  comfort  him,  being  (  be- 
fides  old  Age  )  much  afflided  with  poverty 
andficktteffe. 

II  p.  33.  Ibe  fame  Raphael.  Of  a  certain 
Treafure  fomewhere  under  ground,  (  as  wasfup- 
pefed.  )  Dodor  Dee's  fjuefiions  rather  eluded, 
than  really  anfwered.  Put-offs,  and  Promifes,{of 
vonderful  Wifdom,  &c.  )  Jiill. 

III  ibid.  A  Voice  fent  to  Voaor  Dee,  then(^  as 
it  feemeth  )  alone. 

IV  p.  34.  Raphael  again  :  who,  with  many  fair 
pretenfes,  and  very'' forcible  Bketorick.  {tofuch 
anone  as  Voaor  Dee)  doth  deliver  0.  mtffagt 


unto  him,  of  a  Journey  into  a  far  Country  ,  to 
be  undertaken  by  him  tn  this  his  miferable  cafe 
and  condition,  of  purfe  and  body,  throughyears, 
and  prefentfickjieffe. 

The  danger  of  his  difobedience  herein ,  and  reward 
&f  obedience;  the  Philofop'iers  Stone,  &c, 
ToUor  Dee  is  -.rilling.  (  O  rare  faith  :  or  ra- 
ther prodigious,  but  dtferved  infatuation  •) 
Salisbury,ifl«£i  his  Devils;  //  the  Vevilmaybe 
believed, 

#  p.  56.  Some  Cafes  and  ^ejiions  prcpofed,avd 
to  he  propofed. 

9  It  feems  VoSorDee,  at  this  time,  took^upon  him 
to  he  a  Cunning-man.  His  neceffrty  which  wat 
great,  might  put  him  to  ttto  try  all  means  :  but 
I  thinks  he  was  too  boneji  to  thrive  by  it, 

V  p.  39. 


.sldxv 


The  Table. 


\^p.,  59.      !r6?  /jwf  R.apliaeL      Some  quejiins 
'    (  I  doubt,  how  truly  J  ref,!ved  about  the  Trea- 

.lure.     "The    Journey  h''jiened.      Ike  Hijiorj  of 

.Tobias. 
Yl  p-  40.     R.aphael  in  the  Stone  :   7he  Jewel  ; 
tif  Powder  :  iri  Vocior  Dee's  poJl'^fJioH  ;  but  not 

j[<|  0/ ufe  to  him.      Hit  thankjulnejfe  y  (good 

,nwi. ) 
■^^IJl  p.  41.     Raphael  agiia  in   the  Stone,     the 
Journey.  Great  Fro  wife s  of  WiCdom,  &c.     Do- 
dor  Dec's  enetnies  at  Court.     Money  intended  by 
lif  Eruperour  {  fo  a/fop.  58,)   to  DoSor  Dee, 
hindered.     Some  Cafes^  concerning  others^  and 
himfelfy  at  his  requeji  anfwered. 
VIII  p.    43.     Raphael  ;    Divers  ^ejiions  and 
«  0/J?i  by  him    anfwered.    One  John  Pontoys, 
very  ambitious  toferve  DoSior  Dee,  in  thefe  Ap- 
paritions.    ^  f^hich  end  here  in  our  Relation  ; 


and  probably^  with  hit  life :  or  at  lead,  (  though 
hit  fpirits  had  promifed  him,  p.  34.  addition  of 
many  years )  not  long  before  hit  death.  I  can~ 
not  yet  learn  the  direS  time  of  hit  death  :  but 
much  about  this  time,  (^  by  all  reports  :)  and  in 
England,  certainly.  Though  hit  fin  yf as  very 
great  (  as  in  the  Preface  is  (hewed  .-J  y^t  becaufe 
ofhisfimple  and  fincere  intentions  towards  Gody 
it  may  charitably  be  hopedy  that  God  w,k  fo  mer- 
ciful to  him,  as  to  let  himkjtow  his  errour,  and  ta 
repent  of  it,  before  his_death. 
^  p.  46.  That  which  follows  herCi  if^urtainly 
intended  for  part  of  that  holy  Language, 
which  Adam  in  Paradife  is  fa  id  P.  I  p.  64,  p2. 
to  have  fpokjtn  :  and  by  which  great  wonders 
might  be  wrought,  I  have  neither  faith,  nor  at- 
riofity  to  inquire  into  it  any  further  :  neither 
willy  (I  thinks)  any  fober  man.  '  m 


<k.'^ 


INfteadof  other  Approbation  :  the  Reader  (  befides  the  judgement  Of  the  late  Arch-Bijhop  of  Ar- 
magh :  for  his  Piety  and  Learning  fo  famous  everywhere  ;  fpoken  of  in  the  Treface,  firft  page 
of  it  :  and  the  judgement  of  divers  others,  that  read  the  Book  M  anufcript,and  wi(hed  it  printed  :) 
may  confidcr,  how  lollicitous  the  Devil  hath  been,  when  he  faw  his  plots  (  God  oppofing  )  not  like- 
ly to  take  effcft;  that  tliefe  Myfieries  (  thefe  Papers  and  Records  )  might  not  come  to  light.  Firft, 
by  p.  418.  and  p,  431.  (Doftbr  jpfe's  Letter  to  the  Popes  Nuncio)  and  forae  other  places  of  the 
Book,  it  doth  appear,  that  they  were  all  btrnt,  by  command;  though  feme  afterwards  (  upon  ap- 
pearance of  better  hopesj  ftrangely  reftored  again.  Again,  Part  II  p.  21,  is  that  horrible  impre- 
cation; w  hereof  more  in  the  T^/i/e.  Laftly,  thefe  remaining  Papers  and  Records,  here  exhibited, 
were  under  ground,  God  knows  how  long:  and  fince  that,  though  carefully  preferved,  were  even 
at  the  very  laft,  when  the  worthy  Owner  took  care,  and  was  at  the  coft  to  have  them  tranfcribed  : 
aiid  fo  at  the  laft,  (  not  unluckily,  I  hope  for  the  publick  good  :  )  they  fell  into  my  hands. 


M.   C. 


sr  to 

fi  iti^Ai  at 


/i 


!S 


-liO 


'  &  %4  ot 


•»^  -q  ' 


M 


ERRATA;  Thoje  of  the  Book , 

Any  will  be  found  in  ihe  flaoi^:  a  good  part  prccsecir.p  (befides  ordinary  jjpojraffc^ca/  mi  flakes,  even  where  beft  care  isufed  :) 
from  the  uncorreftedneflsot  the  Co  y  •  which  mig^hc  happen  partly  through  the  iHegib'cnefle  of  the  OiigW.al  it  fcif,  in  ma-' 
ny  places;  and  partly  from  miftakes  inthefaid  0.>-;^!ii<j/,where  mod  legible.  The  caufe  of  which  miftakcs  and  mifwtitirg, 
you  may  finl  r.r  p.  1^9  /.  lo.  rf^e.  an  t  befiJeswhat  is  there  faid,  it  may  be  probably  collefled  from  P. 11.  p.  77. /.  43.  andf. 
13. /.  20.  and  fom:  other  like  places  that  £i.  K^/Zf)'.  tor  the  mod  part,  when  he  made  report  toDcftorDff,  of  voices  and  fpee- 
ches,(  fuchefp;cially  as  were  o£  fpnu  length  )  did  not  I  now  whit  he  faid  himfelf,  and  fo  nn'ght  the  eaficr  uiiftakc.  A  good 
part  of  the  Greek.  P.  /.  p.  17.  was  mifrcportcd,and  raiftal:cn,asis  flicwed  intlie  Frefacep.  ..  .)  and  I  believe  never  throughly  un-' 
derftodd  by  Doftor  t)ie  himfclt:  It  cannot  therefore  b:  expected  o:herwlfc,but  that  there  ihould  be  mjny  fauhs  in  the  writing :  for 
which  1  would  not  have  the  innocent  (the  Pr;nffuand  Corrc!}dis,l  mean:)  to  bear  more  blamejtlian  comes  totheir  fliarc.Yet  how- 
CTei,^houghm<rn>  :  moft  are  fiich(thofe  phccscxcepted  where  the  Oi/^ina/ was  veiy  faulty:)  as  may  cafily  becorrefted  by  an  ordi- 
nary Reader  thicisconverfant  in  books  ot  all  k'mds:Oc  ifnotfoealily  corrcfted  yet  fuch  as  willrlot  bereave  the  Reader  of  the  main 
fenfe  and  matter.  Some  few  paflages  here  and  there,it  mny  be.will  be  found  where  arealonable  Scholar  may  be  put  toitras  F. //.^, 
a.l.i\-aliai  v.ibifmet  iffis  difif-piruis:  which  certainly  tr.uft  be  TC3d,aIafiobifmet.jpfs  difmfentii  :  there  beirg  a  man  fed  (and  perti- 
nent ^allufion,  in  the  words,  to  that  allegorical  7r7£pctuT:<  (rr/r^-iirerf/ng  :  or,  ij<«r;,;^  :  )  of  the  foul,  fo  famous  in  the  Books  o£ 
Philofophcrs ;  Platoniflsefpecially.  Thar  very  expefTi  mis  tobc  found  in  F/afo,  (  cr  Works  commonly  adfcribed  unto  him  :) 
noi'^ifi's'fjiiv  or\i\y  3ni:ififd  aTToSeth^Tp  :  (which  is  the  fame  in  eff.ct :  )  but  even  j^spi  •^?iSuS!r5a« :  alas  conirjrgere,m  It 
is  here,  iome  fuch  places  here  and  there,  may  be  found,  where  the  Reader  niuft  take  fome  time  to  consider,  (in  what  is  Latine, 
ef-iecially  •:  )if  bethink  it  worth  the  whi  e.  I  have  faid  as  mu  h  as  I  think  needful, and  my  leifuewjU  affordme  at  this  time. 

C  Since  this  wtitten,  obfcrving  that  p.  4';5,  404.  the  Lirind  there  in  both  pages,  is  very  full  of  fauks,  (  far  more  there,  than 
any  where  elf^that  1  have  obfeivcd  :)  1  thought  it  would  not  be  amide  to  correft  thofe  t.vo  pages.  The  Reader  may  the  bet* 
ter  knorV  whit  he  hath  to  do  upon  fuch  occalions,  though  I  dare  fay  he  will  not  meet  with  the  like  again  in  the  whole  Book. 

PAge  405.  line  5,  4.  read  Conf.  in  orat'ionevejl'a  r.  t.  q.  capitula,  in  q.  totitis  orationis  u.  ejf.  m.  Pr.  de  prophetiarnm  fy  tevela- 
ttonum  Cfjf  ib.  /.  6  g'atum,  1.  8.  Re^is.  1.  9.  intdligiiuv,  ib.  omnimoda  D.  pot.  1.  i  z-  proph.  fciliCet  di  D.  f  1.  I4.  ecmpUtaM 
((•/ c->nfumrtit.tm.  I.17.  Sam ob banc  canfume.-  -  fcivi(f:t.  ],  i^.pr.phetica—  pr^cipjftisfc.  \.  ig.Chnfiiancs)  — c-llimaiiu 
fyi  prsfcimiam.  l.io.redtfmption'uhnmanie  tonfiimmAtiimc.  1.  21.  Nam  cum  cr.nf.  l.i^.depirentes  eum  de.  1.  23.  ipfemet  Cb. 
\,i6.Cbri(liim-'--  ijicpicfsa  M.  KiJ.hite'pretnlh-nifr.  I.  iV.eo]dimrepetebat  ;  Hz:  funt  verba  qux  loci;tus  fumadvos,  cum 
a'dhuccffcm  vob.  \  ■^Oj'^i.nulUeff.f'Opbeusvdrevd.  ipfjifc. —  dk:ndumc.  I.  32. rev.  fivi  norabili  itlX  B.  Joar-.nii  Ap.  1.  Jf. 
pfi'pbtiav.  1.34.  Erin  iil  c  ei.  Ap.  five  Revelathr^U, ter,  eanddmv.  \.l(i.Priiterea,quter.  1.28  Alluam).  ---dcemusC  \.  19. 
p  \pk  dicit,figL  1.  42.  fynemign.  revcLitknum  extdlat  me,  d.  e.  w.ftimulinc.  1.  43.  toUpb'net.  iy.  Notum  m.  f.  1.  48.  Evan- 
ediliia-  1.  fe.iCfd'Kp/-  l.^'-.pimiHyi7';amhacst.  ].S'^.  p'ophetis.  \.  ^^  u,  cxpreffitde  m,Divinis  EideLciit.  1.  <;  ^  invfibile  q. 
i^Paf^ei^o^.l.i.  q'l'sdpatandlimift  f  -  ■Cbril}it.  \.  z.  A^hum.  \.^  fiipsrvinenmt.  \.  ^.q^xfalla  e.  f  Clauiio.  ^  Ad  fee.  a. 
1.  f.aff:ronav\t.  I.  11,  M.verep.r.  dfcr.  exiftimelis  D.  ].  J}.fecreta,valdel.  1.  i6.  roftrarum  !\.  1.  19.  aSinnes'.  Argdorum 
vidii. D.h.  ].io  fnnt  ceiif.  \.  z6.  Si mpite)nevere,ify uneD-  \.  Z7. admonuijli.  \.  z^.  fyrsibin  m.  — hmnkidar.  1.  30.  expeJivifli. 
\,jt  agn')fcimuf.  1.  ^9.rr.infids  —  fitiebatK.  l.  $n.  qi<i  t.  n:!iii  ^j  ffis  ex  animo  c.  s.  vir.  1.  41.  cbedientiam  cxhibeam.  I.  42. 
fiotos--  fuftimre'TiHS.Ii-  /y^.n'jfiyas--  pe>-7-m.  I.  4^.  autem— ruu  maxima  gratia,  f.  1.4^.  incdhmes.  4*.  n  flrs  o—  fpurcltiisi 
J  ^o.f:ime'tand4^.  \.^\-  nu'dampropcfiii-ms.  \.  ^i.  wib,is  tranf^lutierdjv..  !.  ^4.  Mineig.v.  lucemi^v  —  ftmpiterne;  Vive, 
CrVcre-  I.  ^6  vivm -- ejj'^  :  Meautem.  \.  ^y,i\idimtnum  ify  fincirum  e.  fervxtn :  L  '^S.anie  m.  C  In  the  Margin  (  as  1 
ehuelle:)  In lapide <iiiem  Ang. m . adduxii :  ify  p<r{ciiftde,ainifiia  ^.cv.metid:m. 

Some  things  to  be  correaed  in  the  Preface  :   the  Authorir  hehtg  then  in  a.  Journey  when  it  was  printedy  and 
fo  hit  intended  re-view  being  prevented  by  the  (juickjieffe  of  the  Preffe. 

FIrd,  he  defires  the  Reader  to  take  notice  that  he  finds  his  Orr/wirapfe/e  altered  in  divers  places  :  as  Vhyifphie,  and  Phyhff 
pher  ;  for  :  hihfophie,  &c.  Uyppncr.ms,  for  Hifpocrates,  &€,  Hi.s  loir.tirg  alfo  :  zSyfill  points,  for  t;r;  pomts  :  a  in  the  fccond 
page,  before  Alibufgh  :  and  before  :  T^i  :  which  dorh  much  obfcure  the  fenfe.  f;  Btfidts  this :  (but  1  mud  dcfirc  the  Reader 
firft  to  adde  the f)^;(r«there,none  being  printed  :  J  Page  1.  line  i7.'<''"/:''i<Jn>  rf^e  :  torcid  1  fay,<!?'f.p.ih44.F()J?  then,(as  from 
themth.  p  5.1.6.««'f9.  « t.  p.4.1.14.  how  that  happ.p  5.I  35.r.andothers,fome  to  f- p.  7. 1.4.  r.  in^eni;ous  prof.  p.io.l.i4.which 
may  eaf.  p.i  I.I.43-  io /«/f,ne  .V  So  quoted  indeed  and  believed  by  divers;but  not  rightly;  bjt  however  one  of  the -anc.  p  13.I.19. 
fol.t.  [spifitrJ  e'g  p.  I4.  1.7.r.  by  the  outapp.  ibid  1.  37.  fome  jiiifchitf  w.bcd  ibiil  1  40.  r.  as  the  D.  p.  if.  1.  36.  /.</. 
Cajtr  S^al.  p.  i<f-  I.  23.  and  18,  iraHianus.  ibid  1.  4;.  r.  Reafon :  fight,  S.  ibid  1.  a!r.  that  thofe  ni.  p:  iS.l.  ij.thefecl. 
p. i^.\. i7- admjflffet  illenegarefe  ii.\b.ni.r,[c. illi  igf.  p.i().].7.dejeruiin  lb.  10.  e>7i;/i77»<r.  Ibid  20.  /j;i?MrfW,  Ibid  45:. 
th.  djyes  among  others, oneOTe/7om«ot<e,asw(;  fay, by  5. //.againft  iw.  As  afterwards  (  fome  3.  or  4.  years  after  )  Popifh  im- 
podures  (then  ufcd  anj  difcovered  )  of  the  fame  nature,  fo;  the  advancement  of  their   caufc,  occafioned  another  of  the  fame 

Authour,3nd  Subjefi,  (  exnrcifmrs  )againd  I'ApiJls.  1  have  th- ;  p.  21-  iS-  of^olfciic'-V/s;.  Ib.23.  aiid^Hos.  Ib-  24.  cHtn 

c.f.  P'i;.l.  21.  Chridians:  ackn.  lb.  33.morefcx.  Ib.  55.  Sec- therefore  sv.  p- 14  44.  if.  'fvirarc'.ToiTi.  p-2f.  44- tniea. 

f.Cb.r.  p.  2(?.  2  8-iequcft  t.   p.  27.  2^.  yea  ready,  wh-  p- 28.  11.  forf.  hm,p- j^c.  and  p (  in  Lar.  p.  27.  43.  prcfcnted; 

and  appr.  p- 3».  25- true nat- but  in  the  o.  lb.  :^.  obf- dilig-  ib- 3o.for  that  P. .  . .  himfc'f  f.  p.  }  i.  jr.  comm-.iideth.  p.jj. 
7.  differences  in  r.  Ib-  ii.ii.  of  thing-- hath  d.  p.  j.j.  3^- dchjcd  a-  p.  3  J.  34.  confufed  or  conf.  p.  3s.  7.  Devils  >y-' ibid 
J.  He  did  c.  p- 57.  21.  lived. th,  39.  <;.  more  probably  den-  Ib.  17.  part  it  is(it  any  part  at  all,  and.  not  rather  a  new  coun. 
terfeit  under  an  old  vi7-or  :)  fo  oft.  Ib.  36.  hath  had  a  h-  \'-  ^o.j.fpirimum--  me&iT.  lb-  u.d.  60  ih.lh. '.^-Arf.fac-  Ib-i?. 
formcra.  p- 4  l.23.of  what  is  tr.  p- 43.6.  ihey  may  h.f.  fom- p:rchancetli-  bid  7.  S.ref.  ibid25.inth=  T- ibid  3  3- conce'tcd. 
ibid  43.  feme  Table. p-44-(?.  about  a  y.  p.n6.7.priks  oil.  p-47-2f  •  more  of  it-  It  is  a.  ibid  27.  belonged  u,  p.49.1  j.  «  ho  b.  ib.ji.^  ?. 
5ry6'3u/x©--  32-a(*eMtiii:r«/.  44.  T{6,3oj'@-,45.7r{ifKT2/.  ?.fo.  12.  lallitcas.  4y.of  thiSjOCC. p.f2.3o.  i  knew  p  53  y.and  praying. 
F(J?/<T;prl.22  n^inidety. 

Befidcs  thefis  £rr<i  a's :  it  is  ft  the  Reader  diould  !  now  that  the  written  Copy  of  the  Prefacehii'.  many  rcferrneff  to  the  pages 
of  the  Book  .'Vf  5-which  becauferh;y  d'd  not  agree  wi(h  the  printed  pag"s,  the  Printer  thoug'it  imrcitiprn:  to  fetdown  :  which 
neverthelelTe  hath  bred  fonieconftifion  in  fomeplaces;  as  p.  4*?.  47.  =nJ  elfcv.herc  :  but  may  cafily  be  icclig;^  bv  thcT,».'>/i-, 
at  rhe  beginning.  Asain,  fome  marginal  quotations  are  omitted,  which  m-.y  be  fupplicd-  P.  ii.  againd  the  ^^  4- and  tol- 
lowing  lines :  [T'wri/er/ EntAHy/iJpw  :<;/'.  4.  anrf^.  of  Rhetor- and  I' recti  •  Enih.]  p.  j^?.  sgaind  Jinc  ii,  i-.g^rc-  [Veraac 
memorabilis  H jh'iade  i-  Energumeiii^  &.c-  Lut.  Par,  16:^ .dcdicaied  to  the  King  of  fV^nCf  ]  P.  4?.  againft  1- et^  7- ^irt- [Oe 
arteOramm-l.  i- cap- i^i.p-  1415  '4"--] 

Ladiy,  1  cannot  E,ive  a  reafon  oi'ihe  Italica  t  ot  difF.;tcnt  letter,  in  feme  places :  bat  that  the  Printer,  or  fome  body  c!fc,  hare 
pleafed  their  pbinfies  therein. 

C  \ni\\tTable:    Parti  hA>VT-cf  the  fdme  nature,  \d- Lf-ref,  to   /mv?  Tr.  De?-   Aft.  I.X//r    Some  char-  ardp'nperii,'s. 
AA-CLobleive:  at  leaflet  Tag-     A.&'Cl\'-maCe-nfhisfe,ondL-     ibid  jv  Wrjnr.      Ad- CVf/.  ^n  rfce  Cabale.     Aft.  CXl/l-  i«r 
refervingrfiirotall-  CXVIl-frm  Prei-  h&.CXX.fpd^enof,tev  CXXX.  intoxic-  CX'H'S.W, he  doth leJl li,  ef  ihoje b' 
l»:irt  U  .'&•  IX' pronounced  ag' 


\ 


I  i 


-^-^^^^I^^^T^flh^T^H^-  or  Book,  oi    -E^ocw. 


Se-ptcatrio 


Faiprj^sftT 


I 


rSlT^Cll 


\Sj\cin^ 

r 


grf^  HOLY   TABLE. 


VlTl^^lTl€!t^ii^lr>|gilLl-€:'T'^'^'^''^'^''^'^''^''^'^  "^ 


->^'-^..-.!r- 


.-<i.-S,'J 


R 


■V' 

I, 

■  ■  iH  .J 


A    TR  UE 

ELATION 


OF 


Dr.    DEES   (^jfBions,  mth/pirits. 


Liber  Myftenorum(&  Sanc5li)paralIeInsNovalirque4 

Lefden  May  tt.    1385. 


D.  Is  Dr.  Def,' 

E.  K.  fiYwari 
Keilet.  See  chc 
Pieface. 


S  J.  and  E«  K.  fate  difcourfing  of  the  Noble  Polomati  Albertus 
Lafa  his  great  honour  here  wich  us  obteined  ,  his  great  "ood 
liking  of  all  States  of  the  [)eople  ,  of  them  that  either  fee  him 
or  hear  of  him ,  and  again  how  much  I  was  beholding  to  God 
that  his  heart  rtiouU  fo  fervently  favour  me,  and  that  he  doth 
fo  much  ftrive  to  fupprefle  and  conrbunld  the  malice  and  envie  of 
my  Country-men  againft  me  ,  for  my  better  credit  winning 
or  recovering  to  do  God  better  fervice  hereafter  thereby,  &c- 
Suddenly, there  feemed  to  come  out  of  my  Oratory  a  Sfirituall 
creature  ,  like  a  pretty  g'rle  of  7  or  9  yeares  of  age,  attired  on 
her  head  with  her  hair  rowled  up  beforCjand  hangingdown  veiy  long  behind,witli  a  gown  of 
Sey  5  .....changeable  green  ani  red,  and  with  a  train  (he  feemed  topiay  up  and  down..........  Green ind reJ, 

like,  and  feemed  to  go  in  and  out  behind  my  books,  lying  on  heaps,  the  big-ell and  as 

fhe  (hoiild  ever  go  between  them,  the  books  feemed  to  give  place  lufticiently,  dif....  one  heap 

from  the  other,  while  Ihe  pafTed  between  .hem:  And  fo  I  contideriftli  and  ,.......;..  the  diverfe 

reports  which  E.  K.  made  unto  me  of  this  pretty  nwiden,  and  .....)......, 

A.  I  Caid  , Whofe  maiden  are  you  ? 

..^A.  Sh.   .........  Whofe  man  are  jou'i 

A.  I  am  the  fervant  of  God  both  by  my  bound  duty,  and  alfoi(I  httpe)  by  his  Adoption. 

A  voyce ."iovlhallbe  beate^t   ifjoutell.  ;-'.-\_!--. 

Aw  not  I  a  fine  Maiden  ?   Give  me  leave  to  play  in  yavr  houfe  j  my  Mother  told  me  fie 

would  come  and  dwell  here.  ■  '       .  - 

A.  She  went  up  and  down  with  moft  lively  geflures  of  a  young  girle,  playing  by  her  felfe, 
and  diverfe  times  another  fpake  to  her  from  the  corner  of  my  iludy  by  a  great  Perfpeftive- 
glafle  J  but  none  was  feen  belide  her  felfe. 

VJ?..»i  Shut  I?  I  will  (Now  flie  feemed  to  anfwcr  one  in  the  forefaid  Corner  of  the  Study) 
......  J^  pray  you  let  me.  tarry  a  /itt/f  [fpeaking  to  one  in  the  forefaid  Corner~\ 

A.   Tell  me  who  you  are  .? 

..,.'..i.,  I  fray  you  let  me  flay  -with  you  a.  little^  and-l  Will  tell  you  who  I  ani. 
.A.  In  the  name  of  Jefus  then  tell  me. 

I  rejoyce  in  the  name  of  Jefiu,  and  I  am   a  -poor   little  Maiden  y  Madini  ,   I  am  the 

liji  but   one  of  my  Mothers  children  ,  /  have  little  Baby-childreti  at  home. 
A.  Where  is  your  homef? 

Ma.,.../  dare  not  teUyoiiwhere  I  dwell,  I  (hall  be  beateft. 

A.  You  (hall  not  be  beaten  for  telling  the  truth  to  them  that  love  the  tiuth  ,  to  the  eter- 
nal truth  all  Creatures   muft  be  obedient. 

Ma I  warrant  you  I  will  be  obedient.  My  Sijlersfay  they  muji  all  come  and  dwell  withyou. 

B  A.  I  detire 


Jefas. 


Proles  ipfiUt 
Madini. 


Maiini  her 
Gx  Sifters. 


A  true^elation  ofD\  Dees  AB'tons,  mthfpirtts. 


'  £,,  I  delirc  that  they  who  love  God  fliould  dwell  with  me,  and  I  with  them.      --^  ^^^' 

]yia I  love  jiou  now  joii  talkjof  God. 

Vie.  A.  Youreldeftfifterhernanie  is  E/cwe/i. 

Ma Mjfiihr  ii  not  popart  as  you  make  her. 

hfemili.  A.  6  j  I  ciyyoa  mercy,  flie  is  to  be  pronounced  Efemeli, 

B,  K.  She  fmilcch,  one  calls  her  faying,  Come  away  Maiden- 
Ma.  ......  1  y^ill  read  ever  my  Gentlewoemen  firjK 

My  Majier  Dee  will  teach  me  ,  if  I  fay  amijje. 
r  {i.-Kead  over  youv  Gentlewoemen  as  it  pleafeth  you. 
IVia I  l^ave  Gentlemen  and  Gentlwoemen,  Lookjiou  here. 

E-  K.  She  bringech  a  little  book  out  of  her  pocket, 
-Shepointeth  to  ainf iSiure  the  book. 

Mad Is  not  this  a  pretty  man. 

A.  What  is  his  name  ? 

Ma My faith^  his  name  is  EdwardjLoo^ J««j  he  hutb  n  CrGwn  upon  bts  head^my  Mother 

faith,  that  this  man  was  T>iike  ofTork^. 

E'i\,  She  looketh  uponaPi^«r^  inihe  Bookyvithaforiw^^inhishand 
and  a  Crown  upon  his  head. 

Ma Thiiwas  ajollymanwhen  he  wasKinz,  of  England. 

A.  How  long  fince  is  it  that  he  was  King  oi  England  ? 

Ma, Z5o  you  ask^  me  fuch  a  (jue^ion,  I  am  but  a   little  Maidm?  Lo^here  ithkFatbef 

Richard  Plantagenet,  and  his  father  alfo. 
A.  How  call  you  him  ?  ^^ 

Ma Richard)  Surely  this  was  Richard  Earle  of  Cambridge, 

E.K.  She  turneth  the  book  leaves,  and  faid. 

Mad :Here  if  a  grim  Lord,  He  ma]{eth  me  afraid.  ,    .j 

A.  Why  doth  he  mak  e  you  afraid  ?  • 

Ma He  is  a  jiern  fellow  ,  I  di  not  kjtow  him  what  he  is.  But  this  If  as  the  Puf^etfCh' 

rence.  thiswas  Father  to  Kichmd  Earle  of  Cambridge.  LO)  here  is  Anne  bis  wife. 

E.  K.  Turning  over  the  leafe, 

Jhe  fame  was  heir  to  all  Mortimers  lands. 

Edatwnd  was  her  f^rother. 

Lof  Sir,  here  be  the  wicked  Mortimers. 

B  K.    She  turned  over  diverfe  leaves,  and  then  ftic  (aid 

Ma.. This  fame  is  Roger  Mortimer. 

My  Mother  faith  this  man  was  Earl  of  the  Marches. 

"Xhis  fame  is  his  wife. 

He  had  a  great  deale  of  lands  by  her.,  for  jhe  was  an  Heirc. 
P  enounced         "^^'^  -^"""^  "  viWd  Genvill,  her  Father. 

fenviUe.  Here  is  a  T'ewn  they  call  Wehhy,    Here  is  Bend\ey.    Here  «  Mortimers  Clybery.      Herein 

jpiW  Wenlock.  Here  is  Ludlow .  Here  is  Stanton  Lacy.  Geny'iW  his  wife  was  Heire  of  alt 
thefe.  Here  is  Hugh  Lacy  her  Father.  He  weareth  his  haire  long  ^  for  he  was  Deputy  of  Ire- 
land ;  That  wakfth  him  look^  with  fuch  a  writhen  face.  >y 

(JHy  Jijier  hath  tome  cut  the  other  two  leaves ^  I  will  bring  them  when  you  have  fupped.  rni 

I  pray  do  not  tell  any  body  of  me,  *'^  ^ 

A.  We  were  earneftly  called  for  to  Supper  by  my  folks. 

After  Supper, 

Ma. ......Here  iiWilliam  Lacy  Father  to  Hugh. 

Here  is  K'lchzrd  hisFather.  And  here  is  Sir  Richard  his  Father  ,  aMdhereisWlWhrn  y  Sir 
Richards  Brother*  Here  is  his  gtinginte  Fiance. 
A.  Quo  ainio  Chrifti? 

Her  eldeft  ^^^ ^  warrant  you  my  eldefi  Sijler  Will  tell  you  all.     Here  is  his  going  into  Denmarfc-,^ 

Sifter.  ^y  ^'ft^r  ypill  come  fliortly^  and  tell  you  how  he  married  in  Poland  ,  and  what  iffne  this  Wil- 

Her  Sifter  i»     ham  had. 

to  tell  the  A.  I  pray  declare  the  Pedigree  down  to  this  Mert  Lafcy.  .wWU 

""'  Ma... Alas  ,  I  cannot  tell  whats  dtne  in  other  Countries. 

A.  I  know  you  are  not  Particular  of  this  Country,  but  Univerfal  for  all  countries  in  the 
whole  world,  which  is  indeed  but  one  Countrey,  or  a  great  City,  &c.  „      .„. 

^^'^ ^^11  >   »>y  fifter  will  (hortly  come  and  tell  you  un/ookjd  for  ,  If  you  judge  thefe  thing! 

well  that  Ihavejpok^en.     Nam  vera  funt.  Nam  verus  eft  qui  me  mifit. 

Truth 


A  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dees  JBions,  mth  fpirits.  3 


"tnttb   is   all  that  is  truth. 
lleMortmcvI  fpak^e  of,  is  th^firdofthefix:  r,&f  re  wfrf  ^ar  Mortimers  E<rr/a  0/ March. 
Edmond  was  the  lajiy  and  Roger  thefirji  j  that  Mortimer  ivas  the  Grandfathers  Grandfather  of 
thit^Amond. 

E.  K.  There  fcemeth  fomc  one  to  call  hcr»  whom  I  hear  now. 

Ma  •  I  come.  ,  ,        j  n. 

b..  She  took  up  her  Skrolls  on  the  ground,  of  which  fomc  were  very  old,  and  Ihe  put  \\f 

her  book . 

Ma 't^fis  may  (layidyoti  infonte  llead. 

A.  Mittc  lucem  tuam  &:  veritatem  tuani,  Jefu  Chrifte,Lux  vera,8c  veritatis  pcrennis  Fons, 

Amen. 

L 

Richard  L^fcy. 

Edward  mlliatH  Sir  Richard 

Dux  Ebor.  Lafcy,  Lafcy. 

France.  Richard.     Peter.        Kichard 

France.  Denmark^.     Poland.       Lafcy. 

*•  ^"  3-  milium  Lafcy. 

Geffrey  Genvil.  Hugh  Lafcy. 

pyilde  Genvill-  ^^^^ 

Rogeras  piimus  comes  T.  /«"»  Genvill. 
March. 

Monday  a  Meridie  hora^l  /<rmii,lj8j, 

A.  Wc  prefented  our  felveSjrcady  for  inftruftion  rcceiving,and  prefumed  not  to  call  my 
good  Minirter  fpiritual,  but  by  humble  prayer  referred  all  to  God  his  good  pleafure. 

£  K.  TheGolden  Curtain  which  covcreth  all  the  Stone  hangethftill, 
but  I  heare  a  voice  or  icntence  thrice  repeated,  thus. 

A  voice San&unty  Signat»my&  ad  tempus. 

A.  The  fenfe  hereof  may  be  divers  wayes  ilndcrftood,  and  more  then  I  can  imagine,  but 
which  fenfe  is  to  our  inftruftion  would  I  faine  know. 

A  voice SanSiumyquiA  hoc  vellefuum  5  fi^illatwn  quia  determinatum  ad  tempos. 

E  K.  Hard  fpceches,but  he  couii  nKprfci-tlydifcern  them. 

A  voice Ad  tempus  &  ad  teirtpusQnquam)quia  rerumconfummatio.  All  things  arcat  hand. 

The  Seat  is  prepared. 
Jujiicehath  determined. 
The  Judge  if  not  yet  willing. 

Mercy  thrujleth  it  felf  betwixt  the  "Divinity.  But  itis  fiid^ 
Ihe  Timt^fhall  be  jhortned. 

E  K.  Saw  no  creature :  But  the  voice  came  behind  him  over  his  head, 
till  now;  when  he  cfpicd  one  ftanding  oti  the  Table  befides  the  filke 
clothon  which  the  Stone  flood,  he  Teemed  like  a  Husbandman  all  in  red 
apparel,  red  hofc  clofe  to  his  legs,  a  rtd  jacket,  red  buttoned  cap  on  his  head, 
yea,  and  red  fliooes.  He  asked  £,  2C-  how  he  did,and5.  iC-  anfwered, 
Weill  thank  God. 

iA.  By  your  apparel  it  fliould  feem  you  have  fomewhat  to  fay  concerning  the  Commons 
of  this  Realme,  and  nor  of  high  School-points,  or  Sciences.  /  am  deiirous  to  know  who  i'enC 
you?  What  is  your  melfage  >  and  what  is  your  name  ?  for- a  name  you  have  peculiar  as  all 
Creatures  elfe. 

A.  He  paufed  a  good  while  ;   whereupon  I  asked  him  if  he  confidercd  my  fpeeches  t 

I  cenfider  your  fpeeches,  for  I  have  left  notbwgbehi/td. 

E.  K'  Hckncclechdown  and  (eemcth  to  fay  (omewhat,  his  fpcech  is 
quick,  round, and  ready-  He  feemeth  to  pray  in  a  lira nge  Language  I  per^ 
ceived  thefe  words  among  many  other ,  Oh  Gahire  Rudna  gephm  oh 
Qahirej  &c- 

His  Countenance  was  directed  towards  the  Stone* 

Vejlra  non  me»  facioi 

B  2  E  K. 


—  -    -  'I  -~~ -      ■■  — — ~— — —■■■■—■  II 

4  J  true  Relation  qf  D'.  Dees  JBtons,  whffirits, 

E  K.  Now  he  fiandechup. 

Uaii  not  thou  (aid^Yrornvbowcomeii  thoji?   What  is  thy  mejfage  ?   j^  A.  He  looked  to- 
ward mc  ]  And  halt  urged  my  name  ?    5tf_)7Kg,  All  things  have  a  name.  7t  is  true  ;  for  fo  they 
/C:.  All  thing',  /_,^^^^  hecaii[e  they  are.      H.iji  thou  left  any  thing  I'nfaid  ? 
x^dtcwna'^^'       A.  You  rehearff  my  Tpcc'ches  not  cncly  in  general,  but  alfo  in  particular. 
Tcrt.pmelihi       The  will  of  God  be  done(  to  his  glory  J  for  the  reft. 

Eracomenfit  de      My  vuffagc  is  frcm  him.,  in  whoienanie  thouhaji  def.red  it,  which  hath  [aid  lift  vpthine 

^o^erif  ex-    eyes^aHd  looknMto  {behold  ipryj  (kfum  of  my  Commandments,  j.  What  Jam,  2.  IFhofe  Mim- 

Thetu ^'  ^^'"•*  y*^"  ^''^'  ""'^  (  "^  '^  " ■'"''^  iefore  )  3.  7o  what  end  ajtd  prpofe  it  is. 

our  command  -        '^^"^  '^^"f^  '^  flead  when  Judgement  jUndeth  in  place  ;   For  all  things  are  determined  already. 

td  obfetva-     They  dooresurc opened.    The  7  Governours  have  almoft  ended  their  Government. 

t'-^n.  f/je  Earth  laboureth  as  fick^^  yea  fick^iinto  death. 

Note  7,  jf,^  fVaters  pur  forth  weepings,  and  have  not  moiftweft'fficient  to  quench  their  otvn  for  rows. 

T'he  Aire  witkerethy  for  her  heat  is  infeded. 

T^he  Fire  confiimeth  and  is  fc aided  with  his  own  heat. 

"Xhe  B'dies  above  are  ready  to  fay,   TFe  are  weary  of  ouir  courfes. 

Nature  would  fain  creep  again  into  thebofom  of  her  good  and  gracious  Mafier, 

Varkjiejfeis  now  heavy  and  finkfth  down  together: She  hath  biuldedher  felf,yea  (Ifay)fhe  hath 
advanced  her  felf  into  a  mighty  bialding^he  [aith,Have  dene,  for  I  am  ready  to  receive  my  burden, 

Hellit  felf  is  weary  of  Earth  :  For  why  ^  The  f on  of'Darkneffe  ccmtth  now  to  challenge  his 
Anticlir'ift  his  right  :  and  feeing  all  things  prepared  and  provided,  defireth  to  ejiablijh  himfelf  a.  kjngdom  ;  fay- 
faying  in  the  -^^g^  ^y^  are  mw  jhonge  enough.  Let  us  now  build  us  a  kingdom  upon  earth,  and  Noweftablifh 
lp.ru  ot  Satan,  j.,^^^.  ^.,^j^,^  ^^^  ^^^^jj  ^^^^  confirm  above. 

And  therefore.  Behold  the  end. 

Sorrows.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^^  cometh.  The thy  forrows  (hall  be  greater  than  the  rvveccnefTe,  the  forrcws 

( I  mean  )  of  that  thoiffeeft  ;  I  mean  in  refpfd  of  the  fweetneffe  of  thy  k^nowleJge.     Then  will  you 
lament  and  weep  for  thofc  thou  thoughtji  were  juji  men. 
Labor  Pfhev  you  earnejily  pray  it  Jhallhfaid  unto  you  Ldhoi:.    JVhen  you  Wdhld  tak^e  Mercy  J'vjiice 

pall  fay.  Be  itfo. 

"therefore  (  T  fay  )  thirft  not  overmnch  :  For  fear  leaft  tliy  capacity  be  confounded. 
Neither  move  thou  him  which  hath  moved  all  things  already  to  the  end. 
But  do  th-nth'it  which  is  commanded. 
Neither  prefcribe  thou  any  form  to  God  his  building. 
.  All  things  fl)all  be  brought  into  an  uniformal  Order. 

Al.alait(j>.  nhom  thou  fayefi  that  thou  hafl  not  yet  confirmed  ,   confirm  with  good  C6imfel.    It  iifaid  Ihavt 

accepted  liim. 

Are  not  thefe  News  fufficient "} 

It  isfaidy    He  Jhall  govern  7ne  a  people:  of  himfelf  he  cannot.    Therefore  let  him  believe^  ancL 
kS'"  ^'  /"^^<'«<^6'Kf>j«  that  the   Angel  of  God  hath  fo  governed  him.      Tkdt  in  Eleftion  'Jx  jhall 
govern  him  a  people. 

Defirethhe  to  hear  of  greater  bleffedneffe  ? 
O  King.  He  hath  alfo  faid:   Then _fhall  it  be  faid  unto  him,0  King. 

Videiaminde         It  followeth  Consequently  that  he  is  called,  and  that  to  a  Kingly  Office  :  For  whofifver  is  An- 
f-'t""-?  '■"("  nointed  in  the  Lord,  his  Kingdom  is  for  ever. 

LnsT  ^'^^  ^'  ^'f  '''-'"  few  of  perdition  ?  Let  him  then  with  his  fathers  put  on  the  garmenti  o/pride. 

Pride,  T)efireth  he  news?  Tell  him  thou  haft  prayed  for  himjihc  Devil  envyeth  hira,and  his  eftate.    . 

Tell  him  that  I  fayfo. 

Say  it  is  a  fiame  for  a  Kings  Son  to  ammit  theft  ;  and  for  him  that  is  called,  to  do  tf/e  worses 
of  vnrightcoifncffe.   Studie(i  thou  to  pleafe  him?  Give  him  ifliarp  and  wholefome  counfel.  For  in 
him  (  Zfay  )  thejtate  and  alteration  of  the  whole  World  pall  begin, 
jyouldjilhou  kjiow  from  whence  I  came  ?   Thoupalt. 
But  do  it  Hi.mhly,  it  is  not  my  part  to  meddle  any  further  than  my  charge. 
But  as  it  is  fa  id  before  unto  thee.  So  pall  it  come  top.rjfe.  • 

Mofcs  had  a  red  whereby  he  was  kjtown,  and  the  hand  of  God  approved. 
Let  him  nfe  therefore  to  carry  the  rod  of  righteoufnefle'  about  him. 
Wofes  7.  rbd.         ^"'^  "'^  "'"''  f^^'en  :  and  in  us  is  c&mprcktnded  that  rod  wherewith  Mofes  wrovght.    As  it  it  be- 

^anlhm,fignii-  gun  fo  I  endiWhatyefee  here  is  holy  [^pointing  to  the and  by  himfealed  and  for  until  the  time. 

tMm,ad  lempus.        therefore  tfe patience  herein  until  the  time  that  it  is  faid  unto  thee 

Venice,  videte,  (  6^  loqiiimni  )  Judicia  mea. 
He  that  faith  thus  ^  Ifpeak^  of  my  felf,  and  as  concerning  my  me^.ige,)  is  equal  with  the  great- 
eft  Angels,  and  his  name  is  Murifri. 
Muufii  my  Thouhaji  written  my  name,  and  J  am  of  thy  Ka  lender,  becaufe  thy  Kalendcr  is  of  God. 

Calender.  j^^  ^y  grounds  of  all  thy  Tables  thoupaltfinde  my  name. 

A.  /  remember  not  any  fuch  name  written  by  me,  but  it  may  be  contained  in  forae  new 
Compofition,or  CoUeftion. 

Mur It  is  true  ,for  if  thou  hadji  remembred  all  thofe  things  which  thou  haft  written^  then 

fijonld  notmymcffageneed.  A.  if 


(ui  true  Relation  of  D\.  Decs  ABions,  mth  ffirits. 


A.  If/nii^hcwithoucofFaKling  you, /would  move  two  Petitions  uiiro  you,  one  concerning 
the  Soul,  and  the  orhcr  conceniii.g  the  body  :  Concerning  tiie  Soul,  is  tor  owe  Ifubel  Lijier^ 
whom' the  ivicked  Enemy  hath  lore  afflifted  long  with  dangerous  tertiptatioub,  and  hath 
brought  her  knives  to  deltroy  her  felf  withall;llje  relilleth  hitherto  ,  and  delireth  my  helping 
coiinfel,  which  how  fmall  it  is  God  knoweth.  The  other  is  of  another  w.)nian,who  hath  great 
need,  and  is  driven  to  maintain  her  felf,  her  hu -band  ,  and  three  children  by  her  hand  la- 
bour, and  theroiis  one  t!:at  Vy  dream  is  advertilcd  of  a  place  of  Treafure  hid  in  a  Cellar,which 
this  woniaji  hath  hired  thereupon,  and  hatii  no  longer  time  of  hiring  the  faid  Cellar,  but  till 
Midfummer  next.  She,  and  this  dreaming  Maiden  dig.'^ed  fomcwhat  ,  and  found  certain  to- 
kens nocehed  unto  her:But  fo  left  otf.I  would  i^ladly  iiave  your  help  herein,if  it  pleafed  God. 

Mur I  answer  thee,  Iwill  come  again  focn,  and  thou  fJja/t  receive   a.  Medccine  which  Jhall 

teach  thee  to'workhelp  in  the  firjL  The  fecoiid  is  vanity, for  it  is  not  fo,  ha  to  the  intent  that 
after  great  kfe  cf  this  world  hath  infeUed  the  weakjings  minde  :  Defperacion  might  h(ne  the  more 
^en  and  ready  entrance.     But  yet  jhe  jhall  be  comforted  for  thy  [a\e. 

A.  Thepraife  be  unto  God. 

Mur I  Go.        One  thing  I  have  to  fay^  he  faithfull  in  all  things. 

I  have  faid.  .      _  _ 

.   A.    1  prayed,  and  gave  thanks  hartily  to  God  for  his  mercies,  and  graces ,  and  fo  rofe  up, 

A.     Then  he  faid  write,  M.49.  under  F.  43  under  R.  35.  i.  and  47.  under  JF.  R.  7.7 
ThispalUad  thee  to  my  name^he  that  fent  me  he  amongii  yoll^^.  Amen,  Amen,Amm.l9.  33.  42X 

A.  Note  in  tabula  Colleaa,(which  I  firll  gathered  of  the  49.  good  Angels)  1  took  the  third 

lettersout  of  the  names,  it  is  to  wit,  oucof  the  49'''.  name,  and  th 47.  p-  33'.4--.  which 

agreed  \eij  well  with  the  letters,  but  the  five  and  thij-ticth  name  did  not  yield  R.  in  his  third 
letter.   Therefore  I  am in  the 

Monday  after  fupper  1583.  Junii  5« 

A.  After  fupper,  as  we  were  together  in  my  ftudy,  and  attending  fomewhat  the  return  of 
the  good  meflager  fpiritual,  and  faid  that  he  promifed  to  come  again  fuddenly  ,  he  appeared 
and  anfwered. 

Mur Sol  am,  write  7.  30.25,  44.57.35.46.  • 

To  the  firft  S.  to  the  fecond  O.the  third  L.the  fourth  G.  the  fifth  A,  the  fixth  K.the  7th.  S. 

A.  1  hat  maketh  .S  0  L  G  ^  JR.  5. 

Mur Add  the  firfi,and  laji  number  together, it  maketh  5  3.  let  that  he  the  Centre  to  the  refi, 

A.  To  be  put  to  the  Center  of  the  Steptagomm. 

Mur So.  the  ground  hereof  it  to  he  found  in  the  third  Table  in  the  firji  lookj  I  mean  in  Tfi';  third  Ta- 

tbc  third  of  the  feven,  the  Table  0/  B.  B.  &c.  being  the  firii.  b!e  in  the  firft 

My  name  is  alfo  to  be  found  in  the  fame  Table.  ^°°^' 

Form  this  upon  a  plate  of  lead  :  It  prevailcth  as  a  cure  againft  fuch  infeftions.  My  promife 
is  done. 

A.  How  is  this  to  be  ufed> 

Mur.  ...,., Vfe  it  upon  the  body  moMei,  adding  the  letters  of  her  name  in  a  fmall  Circle  on  the 
back^h(ilfy  not  the  letters  in  their  forms  exprejfed,  but  the  miynber  of  fuch  letters. 

A.   We  know  not  how  to  number  her  name  hi  our  letters. 

Mur Takf  them  out  of  the  fcrond  Table  {any  Table  elfe  of  the  feventh  will  ferve)  fo   tkat  A  The  fefoni 

theu  take  the  numbers  as  thou  fi,ideft  them  placed  with  the  letters.  Tih]^  did  not 

A.   How  is  this  to  be  ufed  about  her  body  ?  forri^'-^d^'ii" 

Mur. ...,,.  As  by  drfcretion  jhall  be  thought  bejl :  It  prevailcth  fufficiently,  fo  it  be  done,  hut  thus  feventh  where 
far  I  teach  thee,  and  this,  of  concerning  nature.  all  the  letter. 

The  health  of  him  which  fen^  me  be  anungli  ym.   A'nen.  might  be  had, 

A.    Gloria  &  gratiarum  aftio  perennis  fit  Deo  noftro  oranipotenti  uni  &  Tr'mOyAmen. 


IfahelLi- 
jj^r,  the 

back  C't'^ 

ofihe  La- 
,min. 


The    fore- 
part of  the 
Lamiri. 


Wednefday  a  Mfrii/e  czrc/r  2<l.   1583.  Jmi^. 

A.  E.  K.  H^^d  been  ever  fince  nine  of  the  Clock  in  the  morning  in  a  marvellous  great  dif- 
quictneffe  of  minde,  fury,  and  rage,  by  reafon  his  brother  Thonm  had  brought  him  news  that 

,  a  Com- 


J  trueV^elationofjy.  I^ttsABions^  yvith  fpirits- 


A  m-tr  vin-  ^  CcmmiHioTi  was  out  to  attache,  and  apprehend  him  as  <t  fellon  for  cojning  of  money.  Second- 
tiuth  in  every  ly,  that  his  wife  was  gone  from  Mirtrefle  Free)iuins  houfe  at  Blohley  ,  and  how  Mr.  Hufej  had 
yiit  thereof ,  reported  him  to  be  a  cofcxcr,  and  had  ufed  very  bitter  and  grievous  reports  of  him  now  of  late; 
and  a  malici-  jj,jj  ^\yj^^  1/,^  wife  was  at  home  with  her  mother  at  Chipping  Norton  ,  whereupon, I  confidering 
"■'^  ^^'  his  great  diforder  and  incumbrance  tcnvard  him  externally,  and  his  greater  offending  of  God 

with  his  furious  impatience  internally  ;  and  remembring  the  whole  premifcs  of  God  his  fer- 
vicc  to  be  performed  by  us  two  (if  we  would  be  dutifuU  fervants  to  his  Divine  Majefty^ 
]  was  touched  with  a  great  pang  of  Compalfion  ,  borh  that  any  Chriftian  fhould  ufe  fnch 
f[>eeches  as  he  ufed,  or  be  of  fo  revenging  a  minde  and  intent  as  he  (hewed  himfelf  to  be  :  and 
aUo  in  refpcft  of  mine  own  credit  to  be  brought  in  doubt,  for  embracing  the  company  of  fuch  an 
cne,a  diforderly  perfon :  And  thirdly  ,  that  the  good  fervice  of  God  might  hereby  be  taken 
from  our  two  executing  ,  to  our  great  danger,  both  in  body  and  foul  :  Therefore  ro  do  my 
Amiurumom-  duty  as  Hi  ViYiiiM'c^oXwtt  (\\\)OX\  our  uniting  for  Gods  fervice')  to  do  for  h'm  (tt  for  my  felf  :\  made 
fiiAcommunia.  God  my  refiige  for  comfort,  counfel,  and  help  in  this  great  affliftion  ,  and  crolFe  of  tempta- 
tion. 

Whereupon  after  my  vehement  and  humble  prayers  for  the  forcfaid  purpofe,  this  voycc 
was  heard  of  E.  K. 

I  had  (upon  fome  reafonablc  re*fpe&)  fetthe  fhew-ftone  with  the  myftcry  in  it,  on 
the  Table  by  £.  K.  alfo. 

A  voyce Let  the  daughters  f  light 

Tak^e  up  their  garments,  let  them  open  the  windows  ef  their  fecret  Clfimbersi  for  the  voyce  of  man 
hath  [aid. 

Oh,  fiiew  thy  felf  to  be  a  God  ;  yea,  pejform  that  which  thou  haft  already  promifed  ,    ga- 
ther your  vejiures  together,  for  thofe  that  are  fick^have  need  of  help  ,y-(t  are  the  children  ofpitty^ 
NoteofDe-      and  inthe  loins  of  conipa^on  do  you  dvell :  for  I  havg  faid,  yon  are.    And  I  have  faid,my  Deter- 
termination      mination  ftall  not  fail,  although  with  the  fons   of  men  my  Determinations  may  be  undeter- 
undetecmina-  mined. 

Note  tenta-        ^"""^  gather  Up  your  garments,  for  the  Cankers  are  ripe  ,  and  the  Biting-worm  feekfth  to  gnasf 
tions  by  the   into  t\}e  Lily. 

Biting  worm.  He  hath  f aid.  Let  me  prove  them,  for  they  are  not  juft  :  lea,  let  me  touch  them  ,fer  they  are 
jmrighteous,  I  have  granted  him  power,  but  without  prevailing,  J  have  given  him  weapons,  but  they 
are  not  jliarpned,  his  fingers  Jhall  defile,  and  yet  not  deface  .  For  I  have  appointed  him  a  night ,  and 
have  prefixed  an  end  thereunto,  to  the  intent  it  may  be  k^nown:  That  thm  far  I  have  ftretcbed  his 
month. 

5.  K,  I  have  heard  a  voycc  about  the  fliew-ftone  very  great ,  as  though 
men  were  beating  down  of  rnud  walls. 
The  thumping,  (huffing,  and  cluttering  is  fiich, 

A  voice Arife,  I  fay  ,  for  I  will  be  revenged  againji  the  fcorning  of  thofe  lyea  ,  of  tbofe 

that  are  furkjings. 

A,  After  a  great  filence  and  paufe ,  appeared  one  on  the  Table  (  without  the  skirtsof 
the  filke  farcenet  )  like  a  woman  having  on  a  red  kirtle  and  above  that  a  white  garment  like 
an  Iriflj  Mantle,  on  her  head  a  round  thing  like  a  Garland,  green  and  like  a  Coronet  under 
the  Garland,  but  not  perfeftly  to  be  difcerned;  on  herbreaft  a  precious  Stone  of  white  co- 
lour, and  on  her  back  another  precious  Stone  ;  both  which  Stones  were  fet  upon  a  Croffe,  in 
the  very  center  of  the  Crofle. 

A.  Your  external  apparel  (  you  Daughter  of  Light  )  you  perceive  that  we  have  fome- 
what  noted  :  but  by  the  power  and  mercy  of  the  external  Light,  we  truft  and  dcfire  to  iin- 
derftand  fomewhat  of  your  internal  vertue. 

Shefaid What  do  youthink^I  am  a  Jewellers  wife  by  my  apparel  ? 

A.  We  deem  you  to  be  the  MefTenger  of  him  that  hath  for  mankind  purchafed  the  Jewel 
of  eternal  Blille,  by  the  incomparable  Jewel  of  his  moft  precious  Blood. 

of  m''oraw-  J^'lhou  have  this  too  ? 

™  behinde  me,      ^'  After  a  pretty  while  iilencc,  I  faid.  We  cxpeft  the  execution  of  the  purpofe  for  which 
'  you  arc  fent. 

She  faid It  is  written  that  Pride  was  thefirji  offence. 

Githgulcag  kjiew  not  himfelf. 

"therefore  he  was  ignorant. 

E  K.  She  is  much  fimbling  about  the  Stone  on  her  breaft ,  and  re-^ 
gardingit. 

£.  K-  Now  She  talkeih  with  other  whom  I  fee  not ,  her  talke  is  very 
fliort  and  quick,  but  I  cannot  perceive  what  (he  faith* 

She Read  what  I  have  faid, 

/read  the  former  wordi. 

She To«  will  grant  me  that  Fride  is  the  great^  ftn,  ' 

Pride 


.ir  ■?Kc:iEV J'C'l  VttviilSik 


qj true^Iation of D^^Dces  J&ms,mthffints^  7 

^^— i^— ■  — — --——-______^_____^--—————^—— —————— ^————^— ————— ^—^—~— 

",  Pride  was  the  caufe  he  kjtew  not  himfe/f, 
/Therefore  Pride  it  the  caufe  of  Ignorance. 
j'A,  The  Argument  is  good. 

She Ignorance  was  the  nakedneffe  wherewithtri you  werefirji  tormsnted^and  thefirji  Plague 

that  fell  unto  man  was  the  want  of  Science. 

E  K.  Now  flic  fpcaketh  to  other  again  who  appeare  not ,  and  thcjr 
fecm  to  anfwer  her  again. 

She The  want  of  Science  hindrethyou  fromkjtowledge  ofyourfelf. 

B  K.  She  lookcth  upon  A-  and  fmilcth-  Now  ftie  fpcaketh  to  the 
unfeen  people  again- 

She Whsfoever  therefore  kjtoweth  not  himfelf^  is  proud. 

A.  God  help  us  to  know  our  felves  for  his  Honour  fake. 

E-  K,  Shelooketh  upon  ^-  andfmileth- 

She Xou  have  time  enough^  therefore  we  may  takf  leafure. 

A.  £  I  made  fpced  to  write,  j 

€.  JC.  She  talketh  again  with  her  invifible  company, 

She Pride  is  rewarded  as  fin.  Ergo  the  firji  offender  was  damned.  What  fay  you  Sir  H 

[fpcaking  to  E.  K.  '] 

frhat  difference  is  between  your  mind  and  Pride  ? 

E,  K.  Whcrqin  am  I  proud } 

She In  t^e_,fa»te  wherein  the  Devil  was,  firJi  proud. 

■  Who  glorified  the  Devil  ? 

&.  K.  God. 

A.  God  glorified  not  the  Devil,  but  before  he  became  a  Devil  he  was  in  glory. 

She The  abufing  of  his  Glorification  made  him  a  Devil :   So  the  abufing  of  the  good-  ADevll, 

nefle  of  God  toward  this  man,  may  make  him  a  Devil. 

The  workj  of  the  Spirit  quicken  ;  the  doings  of  the  Flejh  lead  unto  dejlrpMion.  Art  thou  offend- 
ed to  he  called  a  Devil  ?  Then  extol  not  thy  felf  above  thy  EleAion. 

No  man  ii  elelled  by  proper  name,  but  according  to  the  meafure  of  his  faithy   and  this  faith  is  ^>ii^. 
lively  and  bath  a  quickening  Spirit  in  it  for  ever.  Indeed  thou  art  ignorant  ,  and  therefore  thou  art 
fufficiently  plagued :  thy  lofi  thou  boafi  thy  felf  and  fay.  This  /  can  do? 

The  Reeds  pipe,  but  it  it  long  of  the  wind,  and  herein  thou  (heweli  that  thou  kjiowefinot  thy.  felf^ 
for  that  thou  art  proud  ;  pray  therefore  that  thou  mayeji  have  under jianding,  and  caji  away  pride 
if  thou  wilt  not  be  counted  a  Devil. 

By  trueunderliandingyoulearnjfirji  to  kjiow  your  felves  what  you  are  :  of  whom  you  are^ani 
to  what  end  you  are. 

This  underjianding  caufeth  no  felf -love,  but  a.  fpiritual  felfe-hve. 

This  underjianding  teacheth  no  Blafphemy. 

This  underjianding  teacheth  no  fury. 

It  teachiih  a.  man  to  be  angry,  but  not  wrathful.  Writh. 

Tor  we  may  be  angry,  and  mt  offend*  Wrath  is  to  damnation. 

Therefore ronfideri'ig  th't  Damnation  was  the  end  of  thefirji,  which  was  Pride,and  Igmrancey 
thtpmijhment  ofthefecond  (  which  is  very  loathfome.  ) 

Pray  unto  God  th  u  mayeji  avoid  the  firji,  and  be  unburdened  of  the  fecond. 

Confider  by  whom  thou  art  counfe  lied,  and  of  whom  the  counfel  is  :  with  us  there  is  no  caufe  of  of- 
fencey  neither  is  the  counfel given  with  a  weak^mouth. 

Wilt  thou  be  well  rewarded  >  Why  (iudieji  thou  not  to  do  well  >  muldji  thou  be  one  of  the  cho- 
fen  ?  fiand  jiiffand  be  contented  with  all  temptations* 

I{God  a  God  of  Jujiice  >. 

E'  K.  7c  is  true- 

Be  thou  therefore  a  pjijervant. 

No  man  inheriteth  the  Kingdom  of  Eternity,  without  he  conquer  in  this  World. 

No  man  c«n challenge ]ujlly  a  reward,  without  he  he  aConqitrroiir,  or  do  the  w  r\es  of  lujiict^ 

Doth  the  Devil  perfwadethee  >    Arme  thy  felf  againji  him. 

Doth  the  World  not  lik^e  of  thee  ?  It  is  for  two  canfes ;  either  for  that  thou  live(i  well  and  ligi 
as  a  worldling,  or  elfebecaufe  thywickfdneffe  isfuch  as  that  the  >Vorld  wondreth  at  it.  If  thou  be  in 
the  firji  Rejoyce,  Fur  bleffed  are  thofe  whom  the  World  hateth ;  whek  they  laugh  at  thy  godlineffe, 
Be  ferry  and  grieve  thou  at  their  finfulneffe. 

jfthouoffend  in  the  fecond  flie  bujiily  from  the  World:  Tell  the  Worldwbat  thou  hajl  of  hers, 
and  let  her  be  ajhamedthat  thou  knoweji  her. 

Is  thy  flejh  jiiff-neckjd  ?  Faji  and  pray,  it  doth  avoide  temptation. 

Beforry  alwayes  ;    For  in  this  World  there  is  nothing  to  reloyce  at.    For  fin  onely  provoketh  ^'  ^°"f  «^ 
to  fotrow,  whether  it  be  ofthyfelfor  of  another.  '  r  „j^„. 

Be 


8  J  truel^elation  of  D'.  Dees  jBtons.xrithfitnts, 


Be  ftijf  ag(jinil  temptations:,  for  whofoever  it  not  armed  as  I  aw,  Jlmll  be  vexed  with  the  weapons 
of  his  a4verfary. 
Kcrart'r  ^^>  Garland  is  God/inejfe,  MfjBreftplate  is  Humility,  and  vpn  wy  back,  I  wear  Patience, 

roun^ded'^  ^^'        ^'5)f/>  do  I  Wear  to  the  intent  I  might  Jhew  you  vhatyoupoidd  wear. 

The  attire  of       But  as  thefe  things  are  placed  in  their  crojfes,   fo  do   the  crojfes  alwayes  follow  them  thatweai- 
rpiricittl  crca-  them. 
'"■■'''•  Art  thoupunifijedas  an  Apo'Jle  ?  Rejoyce  ■■,  it  is  a  happy  crojfe. 

Art  thou  vexed  as  a  Tyrant  ?  than\  God  it  is  in  this  World.  For  Utffed  are  thofe  that  arepuni- 
J}jed  here^  to  the  inte>'t  their  fins  maybe  forgotten  hereafter, 

I  terfwjde  to  the  contrary  ;  Be  humble,  feek^  true  wifdom,  then  are  you  truely  fajhioned  accor- 
Good  Angels.  dinZio  your  Mak^r,  and  fl^alt  rei  with  us,  with  Halleluja  in-  Heaven. 
I  have  counfelled,  I  have  done  my  meffage  thus  far, 

L.  Your  counfel  is  perfeftly  good,  and  your  meiTage  merciful.    His  name  be  praifed  and 
glorified  that  fent  you.  Amen. 

As  you  were  called  hither,  by  the  name  oiDaughters  of  Light  :  So  this  other  day,  there 
was  cue  fent  hither  (  of  that  blefled  company  )  who  was  accounted  a  Daughter,  and  had  fix 
Sifters  more  :  That  Daughter  her  name  was  Madini  ;  fo  of  your  name  we  aredefirous  to  be 
informed,  for  diftinftion  and  inftruftions  fake,  in  the  trade  of  thefemyfteries. 

Shefaid It  is  good  to  kjiow  my  name  ;  to  fee  whether  it  agre?  with  my  Do&ri/ie, 

E.  K.  What  can  you  (for  all  your  exhortation  j  accufcmeof? 

Indecdlthankyou  very  heartily  for  your  exhortation  and  good  counfel i 
buthovv  unjuftlyl  ammifufed  at  H«/g>j  hand,  and  io  provoked  to  ihis 
extrcam  i^fBidion  of  mind  and  fundry  unfcemly  Ipceches ,  be  you  Judge 
between /i«y£^  and  me- 

She  faid.  Whofoever  hath  committed  fin  and  is  not  reconciled,  fliall  have  the  reward  of  a  [inner, 
"there  IS  a  double  Kecon:ili.ition,  the  one  is  with  God,  the  other  with  the  Confcience,    S'lt  this  man 
'     is  not  reconciled  in  Confcience  Qrepenteth  not  his  wi-kedneffe  )  thereby  it  followeth  he  c  ami  t  be 
reconciled  with  God  :  Evgo  he  mui  be  rewarded  as  he  is.  The  reward  of  fin  is  to  be  abfent,  or  ra- 
ther to  be  banilhed  in  this  world  from  the  fociety  of  G  d  and  his  Angels. 
Good  Aneels         So  it  falkth  out  to  Regions  and  Countries,  Cities,  Kings   and    ^ubflis.   Authorities    and  their 
©ur  keepers.     Officers,  when  (^I  fay}  they  are  efhangedwith  abfence  0/ their  appointed  and  good  keepers.- 

Therefore  it  proved  that  the  Devil  is  molt  with  him,  and  nearer  with  him.  1 

Whom  the  Devil  is  a  Lord  of,  he  ufeth  as  hii  fervann,and  where  his  fervice  may  be  greatefi  dom^ 
there  is  he  mojl  alledged.  Hisfubtilties  are  principal  and  great  :  And  by  thefi  reafrni  I  pr,ve  that 
John  Hufij,      Hufey  is  eafily  to  be  mfecied,  either  with  envy,  malice,  (lander,  err  diflionour  of  Gjds  word. 
This  is  one  of  thofe  Affauhs  that  is  promifed  jhould  affavlt  you. 

Who  is  to  be  blamed,  he  that  confenteth,  or  he  in  whom  the  procurement  is  ?  Thou  didjl  confent 
.and  chufe  him  for  a  Companion.  Be  not  therefore  angry  at  his  malice ;  for;,  the  fire  that  is,  thou  hajh 
brought  in  with  thine  own  hands. 

To  meafure  the  Enemy  his  indttlhy  is  impojjible  to  loo\  into,  his  fubtiltie  is  mne  incredible. 
The  Reward  of  good  life  is  great :    But  the  filthineffe  that  fin  carryeth  with  it  inthis  World^ 
and  leadethwith  it  into  the  f-Vorld  to  come,  is  nioji  horrible. 

Is  it  not  faid.  That  a  skjrmijh  Jhall  be  Qand  that  great")  but  you  (hall  be  Conquerours  ? 
It  is  written ,  It  i<f  true  and  (hall  be  never  overthrown  ;/o  mighty  is  his  fir ength  that  hath  armed 
himfelf  with  it. 

In  the  Serpents  belly,  there  is  nothing  clean  :  neither  with  unhoneji  perfons  (  ungodly  I  mean") 
is  there  any  pure  fociety  :   Light  agreeth  not  with  Darkjieffe,  nor  vertue  with  vice;  therefore  be  yoU 
Our  uniting,    of  one,  and  in  one,  that  you  may  agree  and  have  the  reward  of  one. 

Behold  it  is  faid,  I  will  part  hounds  between  the  juji  and  the  imjufi,  I  will  fuffrr  the  Enemj  t» 
[owe  difcord  to  the  intent  that  thofe  that  are  my  people  mty  be  feparated  and  have  a  dwelling  by 
themf elves. 
The  neceffiry  Terife  the  Scripture,  it  it  alwayes  feen  that  the  Spirit  of  God  forceth  Satan  in  fpight  of  his 
of  Satin  wo:- liczd  to  fepar ate  the  evil  fromthegood  by  d\[cord,  and  herein  the  Devil  wori{eth  againft  himfelf. 
kingagiiBft  We  good  Angels  keep  fecret  the  My fteries  of  God  ;  things  that  are  to  come  we  alwayes 
De  fnturii  n'tfi  ^^P  '■^''^^  ^^^^  ''■'"  exception.  The  form  of  our  Commandment. 

ju^ronpronun-       Truth  it  is  that  a  Commiffion  is  granted  mt  onely  to  enquire  of  thee,  but  alfo  to   attachthee,  and 
tiant  boni  An-    that  by  the  Council. 

e'l  ■  .  If  he  go  down  he_fhall  be  attached,  therefore  tempt  not  God. 

'^ut'toKeZ/r!"      ^-    Butifhetarry  here  and  his  being  here  fo  known  as  it  is,   it  is  likely  that  he  (hall  be  at- 
*""  cached  here  to  my  no  ("mall  grief  or  difgrace.    VVhatisyour  counfel  herein  ? 

Shefaid It  is  written  mifery  jk  all  not  enter  the  doors   of  him  whom   the  Highejl  hath 

,uV^V  I,   rfjagnified.  DlXlT,  &  D  I  C  O,  &   DICTUM  SIT.    The  world  (hail  never  prevaiie 
Scrow°.°»nci    againft  you. 

Powder.  A.   In  refpcftofthe  Book.,  the  Scrowl,  and  the  Powder  to  be  communicated,  What  is  your 

judge- 
-i 


(tA  true  Relation  of  D^,  Dee  his  ABions,  mthJpiritSy  <3cc.       p 

judgement  or  mind,  feeing  when  he  was  coming  from  Iflington  with  themj   he  was  threatncd 
to  be  pulled  in  pieces  if  he  cTimcwitb  them  to  me  ? 

All  that  is  fpoken  of,  if  in  very  deed,  vanity.  The  book  may  be  iifed  to  a  good  pur pofe.  The  Book 

Tliey  were  wicked  ones.    But  as  thefe  things  are  the  leajtpan  of  this  a£lion,  fo  are  they  n'A  much  to  tound. 
be  looked  after. 

A .  As  concerning  the  Powder  ( I  befecch  you  )  what  is  your  knowledge  of  it  >  The  Powier. 

■'     It  if  a  Branch  of  Natures  life. 

Jt  is  appointed  for  a  time,  and  to  a  purpofe. 
-'     A.  As  concerning  the  earthes  of  the  Eleven  places  being  with  expedition 

What  is  now  to  be  done  with  them  ? 

It  was  a  forefight  of  God,  if  they  had  been  there  now  they  had  atterly  perijhed.  xhc  n  Earths' 

A.   O  JefuSj  that  is  a  marvellous  thing.  ' 

Helas,    that  is  nothing. 

A.  By  nature  they  could  not  hare  periflied  info  fhort  time. 

I  have  [aid. 

E.  K.  Tell  US  your  name, 

If  you  willremember  my  counsel,  I  wi/l  tellyou  my  name. 

E.  K.  Your  counfd  was  by  piccc-meale  cold  me,  that  I  cannot  remember 
it  but  in  general. 

Ton  do,  and  have,  and  I  am  almofi  HATH. 

A.  I  nnderftand  you  to  be  AT  H,  in  figillo  Emeth. 

ATH .So  aw  7  iMt^e  number  of  Gods  Eleft. 

A.  Shall  not  I  make  meancs  to  (JMr.  Richard  loung  ,   as  one  of  the  higher  Commiflioners  j^jr.  Rkhard 
to  do  my  companion  here  fome  good  ?  Ttmg. 

ATH Trouble  your  felfivbenyouneed. 

E.  K.  She  fpake  this  romewhat  tharply. 

Get  your  friends  to  fignifie  down  good  report  of  you. 

Come  not  there  in  many  years. 

A.    As  concerning  my  writing  of  the  holy  Book,  how  ftall  I  do,  by  reafon  of  the  perfeft 
writing  it  in  the  Due  Charafters  >  feeing  many  words  arc  written  fo,  as  the  pronunciation, 
and  the  Orthographie  do  hardly  feem  to  agree  ? 

ATH Toufhall  have  a  School-majier  fnfficient  to  read  untoyou: 

A.  Where  fhall  I  begin  'i 

A  T  H Let  him  lead youto  that,  who  is  within  you. 

A.  As  concerning  Ftfif/ Li/^r  who  is  vext  of  a  wicked  fpirit,  how  well  have  I  executed 
that  which  was  prefcribed  me  ;  or  how  well  doth  it  work  ? 

ATH.  Friend,  It  is  not  of  my  charge. 

Remember  the  true  path  that  leadeth  mto  true  honour,  where  there  'fitteth  a.  Trueandjuji 
GOD,  who  grant  you  his  T>ire&ion  and  ejiablijhynent  of  perfeS  life. 

A  Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 

E.  K.  She  is  gone. 

Jnnii  9.  a  Meridie  hora  5. 

A.  Very  long  I  prayed  in  my  Oratory  and  at  my  Deske  to  have  anfwcr  or  refolutions  of 
divers  doubts  which  I  had  noted  in  a  paper,and  which  doubts  I  read  over  diftinaiy,they  con- 
cerned the  preparation  of  things  about  the  Table  of  praftlce,  and  other  things  above  my 
Lamm  and  Stone  5  but  aiifwer  came  none,  neither  in  the  Stone  did  any  thing  appear  ;  no, 
not  the  Ciolden  Curtain,  but  the  Stone  was  of  his  natural  Diaphanitie.  But  I  held  on  in  pit- 
ti fill  manner  to  requeft  fome  advertifement,iffor  any  our  trelpalTcs  or  offences  this  unlooked 
for  alteration  from  former  dealing  had  hapned,  &c. 

At  length  a  voice  came  from  behind  £.  K.  over  his  head,  and  faid  thus  : 

^'^(^I^^^ 7he  judgements  of  our  God  are  moji  profound  and  hard  in  the  under flandini  of 

man.  ^  a    j 

There  is  filence  above,  let  there  therefore  be  patience  amongji  you^  I  have  faid. 

A.  Upon  this  anfwer  I  began  to  difcoiirfe  of  divers  caufcs  of  this  filence,  and  divers  man-  Silence; 
rtersotlilences^andinthecndl  became  in  a  great  and  forrowfull  heavinefle,  and  fear  of  the 
Wrath,  or  difpleafure  of  God  ;  conceived  for  feme,  our  misbehaviour  towards  him  (ince  our 
lalt  dealing,  whereupon  I  prayed  long  at  my  Desk, (landing  for  mercy,  comfort,  counfel  ,  and 
lome  expoation  of  the  former  fentence.  After  a  long  time  thus  paiTing  there  appeared  one  in 
theveryropof  the  frame  of  the  fhew-lhne,  much  Wke  M/chael. 

VVho  (aid, ......    Write,  for  I  miijibe  gone. 

Silence  there  is  in  heaven,  for  the  Governonrs  of  the  earth  are  now  before  the  Lord  ,  the 
doings  of  their  feats  ate  now  difclofed  ,  every  thing  is  N  O  T  E  D.  For  that  God  will  be 
righteous  in  all  his  douigs. 

There  is  not  this  day  any  one  that  governeth  the  people  upon  earth  ,  but  his  government 

C  is 


cm 


lo      A  tme^dat'ton  of  D^  Dee  h'ts  jBions^ mthjfirits, 6c c, 

is  difclofedj  and  his  government  is  fee  open,  and  his  faults  revealed. 
They  without  number  cry,  Lord,  ice  thy  vengeance  come. 
•     ;  The  earth  faycth.    Be  it  fo. 

S«hin.  Sachan  is  before  the  Lord  :  He  hath  garnirtied  himfelf  with  Garlands  as  a  Conqueronr,  and 

what  he  faith  is  wonderful!. 

Therefore  fhall  the  Lord  open  his  mouth,  and  curfethe  earth,  and  all  living  creatures.  For 
Iniijinty  hath  gotten  the   upper  hand:    Publickly  the  States   of  niankinde  in   the  world  are 
Viols  rc»d;,       condemned. 

We  are  all  filent  and  ready  with  our  Viols  to  powre  the  yprath  of  God  upon  them  ,  when  he 
faith, BE  IT  SO. 

Therefore  be  you  patient.    For,  our  patience  in  an  univerfal  filence. 
Yetawhlli.  We  look  for  the  mouth  of  Juftice  :  But  L  O  :  The  Lord  faith  unto  the  Lord ,  lift  up  thy 

eyes  (O  God.)  Behold,  the  Dignity  oi  thy  workmanfhip  ,  yet  fuffer  for  awhile. 
1585.  1  have  a  people  that  will  forfake  their  cruelty,  and  put  off  their  Garments  that  ftink   of 

abomination,  in  whom  thy  name  fhall  be  magnified,  and  our  glory  in  hcaren  more  exalted. 
But  as  thou  wilt,  fo  be  it. 

Behold,  I  fpeah^  m  body,  becaufe  I  tremble  ,  as  at  the  force  of  thy  great  indignation :  Not- 
^vithftanding,  wc  will  what  thou  wilt. 

If  therefcfre  thefe  wonders  be  fo  great  in  heaven,  wonder  thon  not  at  our  filcnce  :  There- 
fore be  patient,  and  fay  unto  the  earth  i  Why  groaned  thou  fo  hard  ,  or  why  is  thy  body  fo 
rotten  :  Haft  not  thou  juftly  deferved  thefe  things  for  thy  iniquity  ? 

2  fay,  if  you  be  partakers  of  thefe  fecrets,  how  much  more  (hall  you  be  partakers  of  that 
fncetncfle,  which  is  the  eternal  dew,  and  veiy  bread  it  felf  of  life .' 

SO. 

£•  K.    He  is  gone. 

A.  I  prayed  a  pretty  while  after  with  thankf-giving,  8cc. 

Soli  Deo  ftofiro  omnis  laus^potefiMy  &  gloria  infecuJorum  faculaj  Amen. 

^nii  14.   1583.    Friday, a  ftieridify  Hon /^l. 

A.  The  golden  vayl,  or  curtain  appeared,  covering  the  whole  ftone,  whereas  all  other  vayls 
and  curtains  before  did  ufe  to  cover-  but  the  more  parr,  or  thofe  things  which  were  the  ftand- 
faig  implements  of  the  aftion  for  that  time. 

This  appeared  as  foon  as  he  looked  into  the  ftone,  , 

I  made  long,  and  often  prayers  of  thankf-giving,  calling  for  grace  ,  mercy,  and  wifdom  r 
with  fuch  particular  inftruftious  as  1  had  written  down  the  doubts  requiring  light,  or  refolu- 
tion  in  them,  &c. 

At  length  appeared  a  woman  like  an  old  maid  in  a  red  Peticote,  and  with  a  red  filk  upper 
bodies,  her  hair  rould  about  like  a  Scottifti  woman ,  the  fame  beingyellow  :  {be  ftood  alide 

from  the  green  Sarcenet  belonging  to  the  ftone,  and  ftie  faid God  fpeed  my  friends. 

A,  A  good  greeting  to  wi(h  us  fpeed  by  him,  Awen. 

E-  K,  I  never  law  this  woman  before- 

......  It  may  be  yon  have  feen  me,  but  my  apparel  may  alter  wy  fajhion. 

£.  K.  She  (e^meth  to  go  in  a  great  path  before  her  very  fpeedily. 

A.  I  pray  you,  whither  make  you  fuch  a  fpeedy  juumey. 

I  am  going  home,  I  have  been  from  home  thi>  [even-night. 

Klirie  my  mild       ^-  Diftanceof  place  caimot  protraft  time  in  your  journey  homeward. 

hid  angered  J^^h  HOW  he  will  be  angry  with  me^as  he  w^is  with  his  maid.   A.  Every  Aftion  not  yec   ef- 

ttie  on  Thurf-    fefted,  whether  is  it  at  home ,  or  from  home  ? 

w^Ibhefun-         ^'  ^°'^  §i'^"f  X^"  f hen  to  make  fpeed  homeward  ,  and  to  your  home,  and  all  we  to  tht 

duefpcech."     home  where  the  higheft  may  be  well  pleafed. 

So,fo,you  talk^too  wifely  forme. 

All  worldly  ^'  ^      niake  me  to  talk  wifely  indeed,  and  God  take  all  vanity  from  my  heart, 

wifdom  vain,         ••••••  ■^*"  ""y  thinly  me  a  vainhtfwife  to  be  going  thus  long  :  Btt  by  me  you  may  perceive  how  vaitt 

all  worldly  wifdom  is.    I  am  in  a  better  cafe  then  many  are,  for  though  I  be  from  home,  yet  am  t 
going  home,  (ome  there  be  that  neither  have  home,  neither  can  go  home. 

E.  K,  Now  comcth  a  goodly  tall  aged  roan  all  in  black,  with  a  Hat  on 
his  head,  he  hath  a  long  gray  beard  forked,  he  faith  to  the  Maid,  thus  ; 

Old  man Wihther  go  yon  maid? 

Maid Belike  Sir,  you  may  be  fome  kyn  unto  thefe  men,  for  they  are  alfo  dclirous   co 

know  whither  /  do  go. 

Old  man Me  think}  J  Jhould  have  kjiown  you  before  •'' 

Maid. ......  If  you  knew  me  before,  you  may  the  ealicr  know  me  now. 

[Old 


qj  true %eUuQn  of  D^^  Dee  his  Mions,  wh/pirits,  &c.         ii 


[Old  man]  kyhere  have  you  been  ?  and  if  thy  gravity  were  as  good  m  thy  ancient  d/jfemblingy   I 

would  tell  thee. 

Old  man Thefe  words  he  very  large^  what  is  the  caufe  thou  wilt  not  be  acquainted  with  me? 

(I  never  did  thee  harm)  and  I  have  defired  to  be  acquainted  with  thee  a  long  titne. 

Maid.  ......  With  counterfeit  gravity  1  will  never   be  acquauited,  neither  thy  age,  and  thy 

fame  nor  thy  hairs  ,  nor  the  fobernelFe  of  thy  countenance  can  move  rae  to  any  acquaintance 
for  that  thou  never  delightedft  mtrue  wifd.m. 

Old  man Then  go  your  way  like  an  Harlot. 

lifaid ,    If  wicked  words  do  prove  an  Harlot,then  thou  haft  judged  thy  felf. 

E-  K.  Now  ilie  goeth  on  forward,  and  the  Old  man  is  gone  out  of  fight. 
There  appcareth  now  a  young  man,  fitting  on  the  fide  of  a  Ditch ,  and  to 
him  flic  faid, 

M^id What  aileth  you  to  weep  > 

Young  man. . .... .  /  weep  for  thy  difcourtefie. 

Maid Thoucanft  not  move  my  confcience :   No,  (I  fay)  thou  canft  not  move  me  to 

pitty. 

£  K.  She  lickcth  his  tears,  and  faith.  I 

Maid. Every  thing  elfe  hath  fome  fakneffe,  but  here  is  none.  i 

Young  man Ob  I  pray  thee,  do  fomethingfor  me. 

Maid Oh,  toqualifie  thefe  tears,  is  no  other  then  to  dry  rotten  Hemp  with  a  mighty 

fire.  ^ 

Young  mia,..^l„  I  will  fee  thee  hang  d  before  I  will  weep  any  more. 
Maid Every  thing  commonly  teach eth  of  it  felf» 

E-K.  The  young  man  went  away  damping,  and  angry,  and  now  (he  is 
come  where  a  multitude  ot  young  Children  are,  there  is  aiuch  meat  on  a 
Table,  and  the  Children  being  not  high  enough  to  rt^acb  ic,puird  the  maid 
by  the  Cloathsjand  pointed  to  the  meat  jflie  goc-th  round  about  the  Table 
there  is  but  one  difti  uncovered,  and  that  feemtth  io  be  i.ke  dew ,  flic  putteth 
herfing«rsincotheDifli,and  letteth  theChudrea  lick, and  they  tail  down 
dead. 

Maid..,...,  Blame  Jurtice  and  not  me,  for  if  the  Children  had  ever  tafted  of  this  meat  be- 
fore they  might  have  continued' 

E  K.  Now  ftie  mecteth  a  thin  vifag'd  man  very  feeble,  who  ftaggerccJ 
on  his  ftafFe,andhe  faid. 

Feeble Help  me  for  Gods  faks. 

Maid, ..,.,.  1  will  do  my  beft. 

E.  K.  As  fhe  came  toward  the  man,  the  man  fell  down  j  She  hcaveth  him 
up,  and  again  he  falleth  down,  and  ilie  liftcth  at  him  ilill- 

Maid Good  will  forms,  but  the  matter  is  not  fufficienc  :  This  is  long  of  thy  felf. 

Feeble Ohyl  fay,help  me. 

Maid it  is  too  late  to  help  thee,  I  came  this  way  many  times  befere ,  and  thou  never 

fcfughteft  help  at  ray  hands.  It  is  written,  he  that  d^iireth  not  help,  till  he  be  helplefle,he  fhall 
be  voideof  the  benefit  of  an  helper. 

E,  K.  Tne  feeble  man  goeth  away,  and  fhr  deparrech  from  him  :Now 
(he  Cometh  towards  a  man  going  up  an  hili  wno  had  torn  all  his  Cloaths  off 
with  brambles  and  bryars.  Tb  rcftand  a  ^rcatrii  sny  cf  Mawmets ,  little 
ugly  fellows  at  the  top  of  the  hill,  who  thr.vA'  tiont^  againfthim  ,and  fo 
force  this  climing  man  Cor  goer  up  the  hill)  to  ru.mble  down  again  to  the 
foot  of  the  hill.  The  skin  dorh  fcem  to  be  off  his  hands  and  his  fect^  and 
they  very  raw,  with  his  exccfTive  travail  wich  hands  and  feet  up  that  hillj 
Now  there  appear  men  earing  meat  below  at  the  foot  of  the  hiU,who  offered 
him  meat  to  eat  j  But  he  laboureth  up  the  hili  again ,  one  of  thefe  men  faid, 
come  let  me  bind  up  thy  feet. 

TheClymer Vnto  him  that  hath  no  TveariHeffe^  there  belongethm  forrow^ 

E.K.  Sheflandcchandviewcthhim. 

c  2  th«i 


1  z         A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  ABions ,  mth  fpirits,  &c. 


TheClymer I  pray  you  help  me. 

Maid It  is  inipofllble  for  thee  to  get  up  here. 

Clymer Of  my  f elf  it  it :  1  will  never  be  of  the  mindc.   It  is  impoflJble. 

Maid*  ......  Come  on,  I  will  do  the  beft  1  can. 

E,  K.  She  leadeth  him  over  ftones,  and  rocks. 

Maid Thou  wilt  be  knocked  in  pieces,  ere  thou  come  to  the  top. 

Clymer Doyouyyitr  gsodycill,!  feelnoharnt. 

E-iC-  Nov?  flielcadcih  him  in  a  place,  where  Springs,  Quick-mircs,  and 
JBogs  are- 

Maid.  ......  Surely  thou  art  beft  to  go  down,  for  thou  wilt  be  drowned. 

Clymer I  pray  you  help,  1  will  go  at  long  at  I  may. 

E-K-  He  goech  forward,  and  finkethalmoft  to  the  throat. 

Maid It  is  deeper  on  the  further  fide,  thou  wert  beft  to  go  down  again. 

Clymer.  ......  I  feelthe  ground  hardunder  my  feet :  Iwillnot yet  defpair. 

E.  K-  Now  he  cometh  out  of  thofe  deep  places,  and  he  fecmeth  to  come 
to  a  place  like  the  bottom  of  a  hedge,  where  ftand  ftifFc  thorns  ,  piked  up- 
ward, very  ftiarp. 

Now  come  tv/o,  or  three  handfome  fellows,  and  faid,  Alas,let  him  tarry 
here  and  drink,  we  will  lead  him  up  another  ypay  to  morrow- 

Maid Farewell. 

Clymer I  pray  leave  me  not  fo,  let  me  go  with  you. 

Maid. 1  muft  needs  be  gone,  I  cannot  tarry  for  thee. 

Clymer I  am  yet  neither  hungry  nor   tbirfiy  ,  and  feel  no  wearineffe :  Why  therefor t 

Should  I  flay. 

E-  K.  He  goeth,  as  though  the  thorns  prickt  him,  and  grindcth  his  teeth  • 
for  pain- 

Now  they  are  come  to  a  fair  place,  and  then  ftie  faid  to  one. 

A  LdboT  T        Maid.  ^ Fetch  meat  and  drink^and  cloaths  ^and  cure  hii  vounds  :  For  unto  thee  heloMgeth 

imfrobus  C  *^^  felicity  of  this  place  :  For  neither  from  the  higheji  to  theioweji  is  there  any  whom  Ipitty^  butfuch 
emniavm-  C'^^thitis. 

fit.  -J      Clymer I kjiow  not  howl  (hz\\u(e  the fe  things. 

.  Maid. ......  The  true  Heirs  have  alwayes  difcretion. 

To  thee  it  belongeth,  and  for  thee  it  it  prepared. 

Vfe  it  therefore  without  offense  as  thine  own.  ■> 

E-  K-  Now  both  he  and  ftie  go  into  a  Caftlc,  and  the  doors  are  (kut  after 
them,  and  flic  cometh  oucagain- 

Maid. ......  T'his  is  written  for  your  tinderliandwg:  Let  therefore  your  eyes  he  opened  yand  be 

not  blinde.    Neither  forget  what  here  hath  keen  opened.  '  '" 

A.   We  perceive  that  Felkitas  via  ardua  eii^multit  oh  fit  a  difficult  atib  us  &  periculis  ifed  con- 
ftantia&patientia  pervemtur  ad  F^licitatis  arcem,  vihich  we   befccch   the  Almighty  God  to 
grant  unto  us. 

Mzid.....  H^ell,  I  will  he  goingtillyou  have  fupped:  And  then  I  will  tell  you  more  of  my  minde, 

Itwill  be  yet  fiXfOrfevenweekj  journey  before  I  can  get  home. 
ANote4i.or      A.  Sit  benedicfuf  Veui  noiier  nunc  &  femper,  ?imai, 

4j.  dayes,  re-  After  Supper  we  ftaid  awhile  ,  bemg  come  to  the  plate,  and  though  nothing  was  feen,  or 
the'fi'ft^day  of  ^^"'''y^'^  ^  fpake,  afluring  my  felf  of  the  prefeuce  of  the  forefaid  maid  ,  though  as  yet  to  «s 
Auiuftmxz     infcnfible.  j.^.  x..   -    ■  -  -  .' 

inclufive.             A.  We  would  gladly  know  thy  name.  ..  -.tn/o!  •,!  "j-ir; 

GALVAff,        Maid My  name  ii  Gz\ua.''h,  inyour  language  J  am  caHed  ¥'m\i.  '  "i       • 

E.K.  she  fuddenly  appeared  as  flie  fpake  this. 

.A;    That  [F/«;i]  is  Latin.    Gal 7.  , 

Fitisluck.       _'^-   '^ou  dte  none  of  thoCe  that  zrccaWed  filixlucis,  or.  fili£  filiarUm.      Gal.. .".  5Vfl.  '''^ 

Pilie  filiarum.'^    A.    You  will  not  be  oflFcnded,  if  7  propound  a  doubt  fomewhat  impcrtinejK  to  our  matter, 

in  hand,  yet  of  importance  for  us  to  hear  your  judgement  in  the  fame.  Tritemius,i'a.yeth  that 

never  any  good  Angel  was  read  of  to  have  appeared  for})ia.  muliebri;  I  pray  you  to  give  us  an 

nrinlormi     ^"f^^*"  ^°  ^^^^  ^°  S'*^^*^  ^  Clark,  his  words,  which  are  to  be  read  in  his  little  book  ,  O&o  ^£r 

frminia  all-  fiionmn  Maximiliani  C£faris There  §u£jiicne  Stxta.     Sandi  autem  Angeliy  quoniam  affe- 

qiMnio  i^^i-dione  nunquamvariantur  femper  apparent  in  forma  virili.  Nufguam  enim  legimus  fcriptum  quod 
r«am?  bonui  fpirttus  in  forma  fit  vifus  muliebri  ^aut  beftiae  cujufcunqueyfed  femper  in  fpecie  virili. 

Gal. 


J  true  fetation  of  D'.  Dee  his  J&iotjs^  with  fpirits,  (5cc^         i  3 

Gal Yon  tbiMk^then  I  have  fome  KHderJlandifig. 

A,  Yea,  God  knovveth,  I  do. 

Gal F/rli  it  is  evident  that  the  ^iprrits  of  God  are  incomprehenfible  to  thofe  that  are  their 

inferiours  :  For  the  higher  order  is  ijicomparahle  unto  G  d,  And  by  degrees  ^  thtfe  that  are  their 
inferiours  are  alfo  incomparable  loito  them.  It  fo/foweththeref.re,  that  in  refpeij  of  that  degree 
in  Atig''ls  thinz,s  are  inromprehenfible.  a     r      f 

Angels  (  I  faj^  of  themfeheSi  neither  are  man  nor   woman  ;    Ihe.refore  they   do  take  formes  ^.A  nf^^/lV 
not  according  to  any  prsport/on  in  imagination^   but  according  to  the  difct^eet   and  appliab/e  will  r^s,  neqnc  fie- 
both  of  Him,  and  of  the  thingwhtrein  they  are  Adminifirators  :,  For  we  all  are  Spirits  miniftring  minaneque 
the  will  of  God  i  and  unto  whom  ?  unto  every  thing  within   the  compafre  of  Nature  :  onelyf'""' 
to  hit  glory  and  the  7/fe  of  mun.     It  folUweth,    Therefore,  confidenng  that  we  minijier  *^°^  °f  "^^^  l^-al""* 
felvc  s  that  we  Ihouli  minijier  in  that  jinfearchablc  form  within  the  which  our  executions   art  limited  : 
.  But  if  Tritemius  canfay^    Jhat  woman  alfo  hath  not  the  Spirit  of  God^bting  formed  and  fajhioncd 
of  the  felf  fame  matter,  notwithjianding  in  a  contrary  proportion  by  a  degree  ;    If  Tritemius  can 
fepar  ate  the  dignity  of  the  Soulofwotnan  from  the   excellency  of  man  but   according  to  the  form  ef 
the  matter,  then  might  his  Argument  be  good  :    But  becaufe  that  in  man  and  wo  'nati   there  is  propor- 
tion, preparation,  of  f'^niiiftcation  in  eternity  ;    Therefore  may  thofe  that  are  the  eternal  Mi- 
tiifters  of  God  in  proportion  to  Sanftification  take    unto   them  the  bodies  of  them  both.   I  "ic    7 
mean  in  refpeft  of  the  Form  5   For  as  in  bothyu  read  Homo,  fo  in  both  you  find  one  and  thefelf  Hac  \  *"'"*• 
^ame  dignity  in  internal  matter  all  one.    B«f  Tritemius //)<z/^f  in  refpeft  of  the  filihinefle  (w^ic/b 
indeed  is  no  filthineffe  )  wherewith  all  women  are  ftained  -,  and  by  reafom  fram  the  natural  Phi~ 
lofophers  :  as  a  man  tailing  more  of  nature  indeed  then  of  him  which  U  the  iVor^'^nan  or  a  fuperna- 
tural  Mtjier.    He  (  I  fay  )  concluded  his  natural  intention.  In  refpelf  of  my  felf  ,  I  anfwer  Tri-  Oalvah. 
temius  thus  :  I  am  Finis,  7am  a  beam  of  that  Wifdom  which  is  the  end  of  mans  excellency. 

Ihofe  alfo  that  are  called  Filine  and  Fili:e  filiarum  are  all  co-nprehended  in  me,    and  do  attend  Apparition  ia 
«^ow  Tnie  Wifdom  ;    which  if  Tvitemms  marl{_,helhall  perceive   that  true  Wifdom  is  alwayes  the  forme  of 
painted  with  a  womans  garment ;  For  than  the  pureneffe  of  a  Virgin,  Nothing  is  more  com-  woman, 
mendable. 

God  in  his  judgement  kjtowethhowTni:emin%hrtv{2i:de.A  '  Tritemius  tC' 

If  you  think,  thefe  arguments  he  not  piff}iient,the  one  in  refpsci  ofthefirfi  ground,  and  the  other  in  warded. 
refpeH  of  the  meafure  of  my  name,  I  will  yet  alledge  greater. 

A.  Thefe  Arguments  do  fatisfie  me  :  Biit  to  have  wherewith  to  flop  the  mouths  of  others 
who  might  ufe  Ctvillation  upon  fuch  matters,  it  were  foniewhat  needful  to  have  heard  your 
judgement:  Whereas  indeed  our  own  affairs  in  liand  are  rather  to  be  followed  ar  this  pre- 
fcnr,  and  of  greater  Arguments  or  Inftruftions  in  this  matter  I  truft  hereafter  to  have  under- 
ftanding  :  But  as  now  I  chiefly  regard  our  Aftion  in  hand. 

Gal Begin  the  B  ok,Hepit  Tuefduy.  i 

My  felf  will  be  thy  DireUor  ;  And  as  my  name  if,fo  I  witHeid  uiito  the  end.  All  other  thin^i 
»/(•,  according  to  thy  judgement  and  proportion  of  hn  Spirit  that  guidethyou. 

Gal -..  /  my  felf  will  be  the  finger  to  direct  thee. 

A. 

Gal. .... ..  The  finger  of  God  jhetcheth  over  many  mountains. 

His  Spirit  comforteth  the  wcakjteffe  of  many  pla'es.  -         ■ 

No  fenfe  is  unfurniflied  where  his  light  rem aineth  •  ' 

For  under fiand  what  I  am,  and  it  is  a  fifflsient  anfwer , 

t^.  At  the  beginning  to  write  the  Book,  fhall  I  require  your  inftru^ions  ? 

Gal Dofo. 

fhe  Mountains  of  the  World  fhall  He  flat  ;  But  the  Spirit  of  God  Jhall  never  be  confounded, 

E  K.  Shi  fitte:hpnarock^  and  hatli  done  ever  (ince  fupper- 

Ga[,,.....^  Ah  Sirral^as  a  weary. 

A.  AscoiiceiningtheTa/ow//?.'  Lo'rd  Alhertm  Litly  whorii  we  are  certified  to  be  ef  God. 
eleSed  to  govern  him  a  people,  whom  we  are  w  illed  to  love  and  honour,  What  haveyou  to  fay  of 
him  ?  &c. 

Gal Aik.me  thefe  things  tomorrow, 

■'£:•: ^.:  She imilech  and  cartech  alight  from  hei".  Sm.nng. 

■'  Gal.'  ...i'..  I  fmile  becaiife  Ifpeak,  of  to  morrow  ;  yea  I  feem  to  fmile. 
A.  As  concerninj^  Ifabel  Lijier,  I  pray  in  what  cafe  is  fhe  ?  in  refl^eft  of  the  wicked  fpirit  ^_  i^ 
trhich  long  hath  mojefled  her  ? 

Jpal,-., Believe,  For  that, is  the  chiefejt  :  •  , 

What  it  fpoken  hy  m'we  givebut  our  confentto.       •  , 

For  he  that  fpeaketh  in  tis  is  to  be.  asked  no  fuch  qiieffion: '    .   =  *  ■^^^ 

For  when  he  faith,  it  is  measured.  _     *     -,  ,.^,)i 

As  it  was  faid  before  ;  The  Hills  and  Mountains  of  the  WorU  may  he  made  -plain  ,  but.  the 
Spirit  of  God  never  confoundeth.  '  * 

:^.  He  thac  is  the  end  of  all  things,  and  the  end  of  ends  (unto  whom  all  honour  praife  and 
'  '       -  thankf- 


1 4        A  true  Relation  ofiy ,  Dee  his  JBiom,  mthfpirits^  6c  c. 

tliankfgiving  is  due  )  blelfe  us,  endue  us  with  his  graces,  and  abundantly  power  forth   his 

mercy  upon  us. 

^.Finhpar-         Gal Vnderfiand tny nttnif pinicu\2r\y,  <r«i«ot generally. 

tiaJarh  :  fci-       J  f teak,  it  to  avoid  errour. 

l:cet  Ijlusalli-  Perfcvere  to  the  end. 

*'"'^'  A.  ^i  perfeveraverit  fidelif  (_Veo  mjho  ')  ufque    ad  finem  hie  falvus  erit  :  which  faichful- 

nefle  with  all  conftancy  and  patience  the  Bleffied   and  Almighty  Trinity  grant  and  confirm 

unto  us  for  the  glory  and  honour  of  his  Name,  Amen, 

E.  K.  She  is  gone  with  a  brightncfle' 

,  g,  Saturday  aft ernoon^hor a  6.  S  After  that  the  noble  Albertus  Lashje  had  been 

f«B»iiy!  ^'  I  ufed  fomedifcourfe    I  with  me,  and  wa-;  new  gone  to  Londetty 

by  prayer  to  God,  and  afterward  proteftation  to  Grluah  in  refpeft  of  her  willing  me  to  ask 
certain  matters  again  this  day  which.  .  .  .  yefterday  were  not  anfwcrcd  :  But  very  long  it 
was,  above  half  an  hourjbefore  any  thing  appeared,  more  then  the  Golden  Curtain  all  over 
the  Shew  .... 

At  length  appeared  divers  confufed  forms  of  divers  Creatures,  and  then,  by    and  by, 
vanlfhed  away. 

A.   I  prayed  to  God  to  banifh  all  confufion  from  us  and  our  aftions,  and  to  fend  us  lucem 
&  veritatentyper  unum  &  propter  u»u»i,&  COKliantiamrerttm..., 
II,  Then  appeared  he  by  whom  ( before  )  we  were  called  //,  and  feemed  to  fcorn  at  £.  K. 

E.  K.  Here  appeareih  //,  and  he  fce;ncch  to  mock  mc 

IL  That  is  a  gird  to  you  Sir  for  your  filhing. 

A.   £.  iC.  had  fpenc  all  that  afternoon  (almoft  )  in  angling,  when  /  was  very  defirousto 
have  had  his  company  and  helping  hand  in  this  Aftion. 

A.  Shortly  after  this,appeared  Galuah  and  to  be  in  a  field  clofed  round  about  with  a  hedge. 
Gal.   ......  Here  is  no  Wiiy  out. 

11  C  ome  I  Kill  do  fomewhat  for  you  j  It  is  ajirange  thing  that  yf  ifdom  cannot  find  a.  vay 

WifJom.  through  a  hsdge. 

E  K-  This  //  pnlleth  down  the  hedge.' 

Gal. ..  ....Go  thy  Wiry,  thov.  hafi  done  but  thy  dutj/. 

II Farewell  i)ff.  Farewell  JCf/Zy. 

DecKeUj.          €,  iC,  He  is  gone- 
Gal Jhofethat  tajie  of  everlajiiiig  Bankfts,  farewell,  and  de fire  the  fame  t$  others. 

£.  K.  Now  (he  i$  come  to  a  great  Caftl6-gate,all  of  ftone,  with  a  draw- 
Note,        bridge  before  it-  There  is  hkc  a  ^nyhoundgra'ven  or  cm  in  the  Stone  over  the 

Gate- 
Gal It  it  very  late,  Iwill  loo\.  if  I  can  have  my  entertainment  here,         1583^ 

E-K.  She  is  gone  in. 

/k.  After  a  while  flie  came  out  again. 

Gal Beeitfpokjn, 

Curfed^  defaced,  and  damned  be  this  plaxe. 

A  Yoice  outof  ■     Gal And  why  ?  Eecaufe  they  have  puffed  up  their  flejh^  follow  their    own  imaginations^ 

the  Stone.        wallowing  in  their  filtbinefe  ,    as  Swine  that  tumble  in  mire. 

Behold  It  is  too  late  with  this  people,  lean  get  no  lodging.     0  ye  my  feet,  be  a  witneffe  againfi 
them.,  ht  the  windes  move  the  duji  to  report  their  wtkjndneffe. 

E  K-  Now  flic  gocth  a  long  a  great  Way,  like  a  common  high-way; 

and  the  light  of  the  Air  about  her  feemed   fomewhat  dark  like  Evening 

or  Twilight- 
Gal 7ea  thougkyou  have  too  much  light,  I  have  too  little. 

1  did  but  over-hear  you,  when  you  f aw  me  not. 

ts.  [_iiote.   I  had  fpokcnof  too  much  light  coming  from  the  weft  window  of  my  Study 

toward  theTaWe,  where  the  Shcw-ftone  flood,  when  we  began  now  to  attend  her  coming, 

and  thereupon  fiie  fpoke  this.  ] 

E-K-  H^r  own  garments  call  a  light- 

E.  K-  Now  file  Cometh  amongu  a  company  of  men /;4V7U5g^ai»«j/Kr- 
red  with  Tvhitgy  and  feme  of  them  having  f^ehgt  Caps,  and  fome  Hats, 
One  of  them  faid  to  her,  What  art  thou  ? 

Gal Ikjiow  not  what  I  am  myfelf 

mil  you  buy  anypretious  Stones  of  me  .<" 

E-  K-  She 


(^  true  Relation  of  D"^ .  Dee  his  J&ions,  mtb  fpiri^s,dcc,       i  r 


£.  K.  She  caketh  out  of  her  bolomcagrcat  many  of  precious  ftones  un- 
cut, or  un poll  (lied- 
E- K.    ihefc  men  look  on  them. 

Gal Tr.'/f/j,  thfj  are  pure  and  good. 

E.  K-  They  lay  alfo  i  Surely  they  feera  to  be  good ,  delivering  ihem  from 

one  to  another" 

E.  K-    1  here  appear  two  fat  men  5  who  (aid,  let  us  firft  get  money  before 

Wc  buy  fuch  trifles  =  be/idcs  that,  they  have  not  their  pcrfed  form- 
Gal.  I  prajij/OK,  buy  one  of  them  of  me. 

Will  you  bi'y  none  neither  ? 

E.  K.  She  fpcakech  that  to  them ,  who  firft  praifed  the  ftones- 

'tup  ,  I  pay  thee  go  ahout  thy  bufines  ,  doji  thou  net  perceive  bcft>  tbey  are  found  /««/?  Thofe  men 

vithalL? 

Gal.  .....  7'w/fc,  Tujhy  they  be  not  cut  for  your  fajhion, 

Be  it  f aid.  Avoycefrom 

"their  fenfes  are  glutted  tpith  tranfitory  vanities.  dteftone. 

Gal Let  them  (^therefore")  ferijh  vainly^becaufe  they  are  tranfitory. 

t-K-  Now  (he Cometh  yphere  jhe  muti  clamber  up  amJl^  haying  fleps  inihisPirabic, 
it  ofraggcd  ftones  i  There  is  a  fair  buildmg  beyond  it.    There  go  many  up  div^'^s^t^mes " 
ihofe  ftcps :  and  when  they  are  almoft  at  the  top  ,  there  meeteth  them  (omc/p°'7".»^'r''- 
who  take  them  by  the  hand, and  help  them  up  and  over  into  the  place  f^out^i"  of 
Then  one  of  them  that  ftood  at  the  top  of  the  wall  (who  had  a  furred  ^"^''*"  * 
Gown)  and  helping  of  menup,faid  to  hci^Cotn^away  woman,  wilt  thou 
come  up? 

E.  K.  She  faith  nothing  to  him^but  ftandeth  ftill,and  looketh  away  from 
him* 

E'  K.  Again,  that  man  faid  to  her,  come  away  wilt  thou  come  up? 

Gal Vnha-ppy  are  th'fe  vrhom  thou  helpeji  :  Andwhofe  breath  hath  infeded  many^your  binds 

are  too  bloudy,  for  me  to  come  anighyou. 

E-  K-  Now  come  handlome  women  to  the  wall,  and  fomc  faid,  good 
lifter,  1  pray  you  come  away- 

Gal  .....   Your  voluptuous  father  k^towethtne  not,  for  his  daughter,  I  denyyo 

E.  K.   Now  con^e  two,  or  three  bra've  fel'oTts  with  Rapiers  by  their  The  Anyre  of 
fides,and  having /;;irri  without  bands,  and  the  r  ho/en  pinned  up,  and  with  'tutrbfThe 
no  garters ;  thcle  help  up  people  that  come,  and  one  ol  them  faid  :  Tarrv  a^°""- 
littlCjWoman,  and  I  will  help  thee  ftiortiy. 

Gz\...,„Fy  upon  you  .-  your  cloaths  are  infeUed  with  diominations  of  your  Chamber  y  I  fPtll 
tarry  time. 

E-  K.  Now  Cometh  a  big  rtout  man  to  the  top  of  the  wall,  and  a  boy 
with  a  Crown  on  his  head :  He  feemcth  to  be  about  « 8-  years  old. 

So  it  »,  and  pleafeyour  Majeliy  :  Therefore  let  this  v/zy  be  razed.  —^    .       . . 

E-  K.  Hcfpake  to  the  young  King  upon  former  talk  between  them™*"- 
which  i  heard  not- 

Be  it  done,  . 

.  A  voyce  out  of 

E.  K,  The  ypillquaketb  andfalieth  down  ',  And  fome  of  the  jolly  fellowes  '•^'='^°"«= 
which  were  on  the  wall  before,  fell  down,  and  other  tcllowes  came  and  dig-  Jcndown.*""" 
ged  a  great  hole,  or  breach  in  the  wall. 

Gal Thankj  be  to  Gtd  :  Now^  here  is  entrance  enough 

i.K.  Shegoethin. 

The 


6       A  true^elationofD\  Dee  hisJBiom,  mthfpirks,  &c. 


The  young  maoi  or  ftriplin  (with  the  Crown  on  his  head)  and  the  other 
bi(T  man  embraccch  her :  His  Crown  is  a  Triple  Crown  ^or  three  Crowns 
one  upon  another-  He  hath  a  little  thing  in  his  hand .,  which  he  holdcth 
clofe,  and  ovcr-gripeth,  \o  that  it  cannot  be  difcerncd. 

,    ..  Jijoitgh  thou  halt  travelled  its  a  weman,  thou  palt  HOW  be  kjioWH  to  be  a  man. 

E'  K  He  rpake  to  (^ahah-  They  embrace  each  other-  They  fetch  deaths 
for  her,  and  put  upon  her  a  black  Gown,  a  mans  Gown,  as  the  Gown  of  a 
Counfeller- 

Gaivab  trinf-      Shc  kncclcth  down  like  a  man  in  form,  her  head  and  all- 

formed  into  a     g  jr  n^^^^  ^^^  youngKing  fpakc  to  her,  faying,  ^ 

JVkat  this  Rod  maji doyWor\. 

E.  K-  He  giveth  the  transformed  man  a  Rod  j  one  half  being  bloud  \  and 
the  other  half  white,  the  partition  of  thefe  two  being  long- wife. 

A  voyce  out  ^^  jufta  funt  faciet  &  meas  menfurabit  virtutes. 

Thi'u^v.^ov  For  untill  it  was  appointed,  I  fought  it  not. 

med  man.  let  US  cleanfe  the  Court,  and  examine  the  multitude  j 

A  voyce  out  For  erroar  is  alwayes  covered  in  many. 

of  the  (tone,  Gurfed  are  thofe  that  are  judged  by  a  multitude. 

NOTE.  £  j^   ^11  they  that  fell  off  the  wall  ,and  they  that  would  have  helped 

r     hetuv.thcvcomc'in  hound  hand  and  foot' 

formed,  Root  them  cut  ,  0  King  ,  fittj  no  fuch  ^erjons,  for  thofe  be  thefe  that  never  had  mercy  on  ^ 

tkemfehes. 

E.  K.  Now  cometh  a  TPoman out^haiehg  a  Cro'^n  on  her  head  •'  ftie  hath  a 
long  viftgc. 

The  big  man.        Jsjay,  let  her  drhiKaspe  hath  deferved. 

E.  K.  The  transformed  man  layeth  down  the  Rod  before  him,and  begin- 
neth  to  V  veep  •  and  faid^  Let  it  not  be  faidy  lutl  phty  the  anointed^ 

The  big  man •  Let  her  die  ,  for  Jhe  hath  deferved  death.  ; 

E,  JfC-  Other  men  about  her  lay  hand  on  her,  and  pluck  the  Crown  off  her 
head. 

The  transformed  mantaketh  up  his  Rod,  and  layeth  upon  the  top,  or 
Crown  of  that  womans  head, 

£-  K'  The  young  King  faycth  unto  her,  What  wilt  thou  ? 

The  womjn.  If  '^  fie 4^ you,  pardon  for  my  life  and  dignity. 

E.  i<C*  The  bigge  man,  and  the  young  Ring  talk  together  afide,  the  wo^ 
man  holdeth  her  hands  abroad,  and  knocks  her  brcaft?And  a  great  com;: 
pany  of  them  about  her  are  hewed  in  pieces, hyioimcviizv^  turned- 

1583. 

A  voyce  out         Adjpvaho, 

oftheftone.       £ jj^.   jhc  King  and  thc  blggc  ffiau  comc  iu  again. 
The  transfer.     Eo  JC-  Thc  King  faid  to thc  transfomied  man  j  Bc  it  as  thou  vvilt,E^  you 
tfi^o  joyned  together-  For  I  with  you  both  well- 

E.  K-  The  woman  boweth  down  with  obeyfance  ,  and  thankcch 
them. 

E'  K.  The  bigge  man  taketh  the  King  by  the  hand,  and  the  transformed 
man  taketh  the  woman  by  the  hands ,  and  putteth  her  hands  to  the  hands 
of  the  K-ing,  and  the  bigge  man ,-  they  take  each  other  by  the  hand ,  and  kifTc 

^"-  S.K.  All 

n 


mcd  man. 


J  true  ^{elation  of  D".  Dee  his  JBtom  mth  fpirits,  (3c c.         17 

B.  K,  All  is  now  on  the  fuddcn  vaniftied  away,  and  ihc  transformed  man 
is  returned  again  to  her  wonr.ans  (liapc,  and  file  faid. 

Gal 'Now  l-pcill go  withyni,  Sir,your  ]ourney,  ^ 

E-  K,  She  fpeakcth  to  you  a. 

To  A Iwtllleadjo",ifyouwil(fonowmeup. 

Bt4t  you  rn'ijl  have  brok/n  (J.unns. 

A.  By  Gods  <;race,an(l  with  his'help  J  will  follow  yon, and  in  rerpeft  of  my  fhinns  break- 
ine  the  joy  of  the  confcqii  ent  efFeft  will  ntterly  take  away  the  grief  of  the  ftiinns  breaking. 

Gal And  to  you  Sir y  you  -were  heft  to  hnntand  firti  after  Verity. 

f  A.Shefpake fo  to  £.  K.  becanfe  he fpent  too  much  time  in  FilTiing  and  Angling.  ] 

Gal WE?o-w  r/in3«fawcft  here  (hall  govern  over  21  Kmgdoms.  ii.Kingdomt, 

£i,  jftherebenomyftery  inthat  fpeech  ,  the  Conqueft  muft  be  great,  and  the  trouble 
great  and  ftrange. 

f.  K..  She  gocth  on  her  way  along  z  lane- 

A,  We  know  not  who  fliould  be  that  King  fo  (hewed. 

Gal Sure  thy  demitndi  are  fully  anfwered. 

Confider  thou  what  thou  feel{eft, 
Andofwhom  thtufeekflf, 
And  by  whofe  help. 
Ihen  look^to  that  which  is  declared. 

I  will  follow  my  office,  for  in  thofe  things  wherein  thou  art  inqiiifitive  I  have  ihewed  the  End.      j^^  ^^^ 
A.  Tmely  the  occafion  of  my  prefenc  asking  you  fome  queltions  ,  arofc  upon  matter  con- 
cerning this  Noble  Polonian^  of  whom  you  bad  us  yefterday  ask  as  this  day. 

Gal Vanity  hangeth  not  at  mine  Elbow.  ' 

Believeli  thou  that  already  fpokfn  ^  fpokjn  (  I  fay  )  of  him  ? 

A.  Yea  forfoothj/do  believe  it. 

Gal .......  /  fay  unto  thee.  His  name  is  in  the  Book,  of  Life  :  "The  Sun  (hall  not  pa(re  his  ccwrfe  ^j^^  Prjnce 

before  he  be  a  King.     His  Counf^I  Jhall  breed  Alteration  ef  this  State  j  yea  of   the  whole  ^/^  Utkie, 
World. 

What  wouldil  thou  kjtow  of  him  ? 

A.    If  his  Kingdom  (hall  be  of  Poland,  or  what  Land  elfc. 

Gal Of  two  Kingdoms. 

A.  Which  1  befecch  you  > 

Gal The  one  thou  haft  repeated,  and  the  cither  Ix  feekjth  as  right,  ,  ^ 

A,  God  grant  him  fufficientdireftioa  to  do  all  things  fo,  as  may  plcafe  the  Higheft  in  his 
calling. 

Gal He  Jhall  want  no  direUion  in  ajiy  thinghe  defireth. 

A.  As  concerning  the  troubles  of  Auguji  next,  and  the  dangers  then.  What  is  the  beft  for  Auguft, 
him  to  do  ?  to  be  going  home  before,  or  to  tarry  here  ? 

Gal Whom  God  hath  armed.   No  man  can  prevaile  again'i. 

A.  In  refpeftofmyown  (late  with  the  Prince,  I  pray  how  much  hath  he  prevailed  to  win 
me  due  credit :  and  in  what  cafe  (tandeth  my  fute,or  how  am  I  to  ufe  my  felf  therein  ?  The  premlfes 

Gal I  have  told  you  that  at  large  even  now,  and  if  thou  look   into  thofe  things  that  are  «=  ananfvrer 

now  toldt  and  arc  now  done.  ^- „ 

A.   Concerning C^/r/pi  S[ed,\\i^  nofe  gu(hing  with  blood  twice  ye(ternight  and  this  mor- 
ning upon  my  charitable  inftruftions  giving  him  to  vertUe  and  godlinefle. 

Gal /  ktiow  him  not :  n  r   any  name  hath  he  with  in. 

A.   Meaneth  he  well  towards  me  ? 

Gal Whatfoever  a  wicked  man  meaneth  it  is  not  well ;   hut  'in  that  fenfe  it  ii  demanaed  ^ 

Ix  meaneth  well. 

The  evil  fpirit  that  poffejfeth  him  'tpas  caft  out  of  him,  even  at  hit  nnfe,  at  the  prefence  of  thofe  cbtrletSkd, 
that  were  present  with  thee. 

A. 
>    Gal.  ......  Believe  me  we  know  not  his  name  ;  Trouble  me  no  more  with  him. 

A.  O  Lord,  though  menbefraile,  faulty  ,  and  filthy,  yet  thy  mercies  are  moft  praifc- 
worthy  (  among  all  generations  )  of  all  thy  doings. 

Gal.  «9j>.,  Holdthy peace,  we  are  now  to  execute  the  Jtijiice  of  God. 

A.  I  fpake  a  great  while  of  the  rrtercies  of  God  and  his  Jufticc  ,  and  gave  thanks  for  our 
Calling  and  Eleftion  into  this  blefTcd  ftate. 

Gal. .....  /  Will  take  up  my  lodging  for  thii  night. 

A.  God  grant  ine  worthy  of  fuch  godly  ghefts,  God  grant  me  a  dwelling  with  you  where 
his  name  is  eternally  praifed,   glorified,  and  fanftified  :  To  him  all  Creatures  render  thanks, 
honour,  and  glory.  Amen. 
.»»...  Amen, 

^  •>  Ai  This 


1 


8        A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  Anions  mthfpir'its,  6c  g. 


ii.j  bionc 


-out  of       ^'    This  voice  out  of  the  Stone  being  taken  to  be  the  voice  of  God,  importeth    as  much  as 
one.        if  God  himfelt  had  fealed  to  that  as  his  will  and  decree,    That  all  Creatures   fhould  render 
thankes  unto  him  and  glory  ;  ^««r  :    Dignum&  JnjiKm  eft.  Amen. 


Noic, 


I'liefriay  ]un\i  1^  Aff.  1<^S^.  ante  weridiem  circa  p.  -r       c>^     ' 

t..  7  prayed  firft,  and  declared  our  attending   this  day  the  promile  of  God  to  be  per- 
formed,  &c. 

Ga Are  four  hours  yet  to  come  ?  and  I  will  he  ready. 

Are  thew^rks  of  wifdoinfecret,  until  I  have  afcended  this  Hill  • 

Is  the  Harveft  ready  when  the  Corn  it  ripe  ? 

Are  the  Labourers  ready  when  their  Inlhuments  are  prepared  ? 

I  have  faid. 
All  -iciflom  it  reckfinedhy  the  eternal  ffill  i  a^^untilit  be  faid,    there  is  no  aciion  toUerable  j 
When  the  Sun  fljinetk  I  will  appear  am.ngft yon  ;  when  it  Is  f aid  Came:,  lo  I  am  ready.   The  dayes  of 
your  fathers  were  hlefd;  but  the  hour  when  thit  Book,  ihall  be   written  Ihall  he  (zna:iiied,jea  m 
the  }i:i4deii  f  inteil.-dual  underftanding. 

For  herein  is  the  Creation  0/ Adam  with  his  tranfgreffion.   Th^  Vignity  and  wifdom  he  had. 
The  Errour  and  horror  wherein  he  was  drowned,  yea  herein  is  the  power  fpread  of  the  highejl 
wording  in  all  Creatures, 

For  as  there  is  a  partioiil-*r  Sonl  or  fire  infiamiMg  u»to  every  body  (  I  mean  reafonable  )  So  there 
is  an  Vniverfal  fire  and  a  general  hrightneffe  giving  general  light  unto  thnn,  which  is  but  One^  and 
Jhineth  through  the  whole, yea  is  meafured  equally  unto  every  thingfrom  thebeginntHg. 
The  life  of  all  things  is  here  kjzown  : 
The  reward  of  death  to  thofe  that  are  rewarded  for  life. 

iSlone  are  rewarded  but  according  to  their  deferts  :    of  the  which  there  are  two  kinds. 
I    Ihefe  are  rewarded  with  death  for  their  wickednejfe. 
2.  So  are  they  rewarded  with  life  for  their  coniant  living. 
Among]}  the  Angels  there  way  be  err  our  y  and  fin  may  make  them  fall  fnm  the  hrightneffe  of  their 

glory. 

But  to  the  Soul  of  man  (  being  once  glorified  )  firiis  utterly,  yea  woft  largely  oppofite  :  Neither 
(hall  that  disunity  ever  he  loft,ftained,  or  defaced,  that  is  obtained  here  With  the  worker  of  righte- 
oufncffe  and  true  wifdom^ 

Whatfoiver  hath  heen  from  the  beginning  X  fixce  it  was  faid  in  Divine  Determittatiom,  Be  it 
done  )  is  here  inclofed. 

Therefore  Ihould  this  day  he  Hallowed  and  Sanctified  before  the  Lord  by  you. 
,  for  if  the  Prophets  ,   did  worfliip  this  day  of  his  afcenfion ,   much  more  ought  you  (which 

have  tailed  of  the  firji,  end  (kail  now  tafle  of  the  fecrets  of  his  Judgements )  glorifie  his  coming  : 
Satan,  But  with  you  Satan  is  bufie  j  His  briftles  ftand  up,  his  featljers  are  caft  abroad. 

Therefore  watch  and  pray  ;  For  thofe  that  go  to  Banquets  put  on  their  upper  garments.  Ammgji 
you  therefore  is  no  found  belief ;  Neither  do  youconftder  the  fcope  of  this  bleffrdneffe  :  Butfuch 
is  tljegreatneffe  and  excellency  of  his  forekjiowledge,that  he  fuffereth  the  enemy  to  carry  a  burden, 
yea  fometimes  to  preach  upon  a  Stage  :  For  it  is  faid,  Hejhall  triumph  unto  the  end,  and  flare 
himfelf  here  as  he  would  have  done  above  ;  Neither  fl^all  he  he  thruji  out  of  doors  till  the  end  be 
determined.  Therefore  watch  and  pray,  and  look,  about  with  diligence  ;  for  thofe  things  Jhall  he 
opened  unto  you  which  have  no  t  been  difclofed  unto  the  Holy  Ones. 

Oh,  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  for  fiejh  to  continue  in  the  workj  of  Jujlice  ! 

Tea,  oh  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  for  Wifiom  to  he  acquainted  with  a  hotchpot  of  filthineffe  ? 

Cleanfeyour  garmentSyLift  upyoiir  hearts,  and  rent  your  fanlts  in  pieces,  that  there  may  be 
one  heart  with  one  confent,  and  unto  one  end,  unto  him  which  is  One  and  the  End  of  all  things  :  and 
to  him  for  and  in  his  truth,andfor  the  greatneffc  of  his  mercies :  To  whom  bepratfe  for  ever. 

A.  Amen. 

E-  K.  All  the  while  (lie  fpake  there  came  a  bright  beamefrom  the  My* 
ftical  Stone  to  the  body  of  her,  and  at  the  end  fhe  mounted  upward  and 
difappeared. 

A.  We  fet  up  the  hour  glaflcs  to  meafure  four  hours  juftly  after  this  anfwer  and  in- 
ftruftions. 

Tiiefday,  After  Dinner  about  one  of  the  clock  and*  the  hours  expired,  and  we  attended 
the  mercy  oftheHighcft. 

A.  At  a  great  gladfome  fhining  of  the  Sun  (  whereas  it  had  not  fliined  but  a  little  and  in  . 
conftantly  ever  fince  his  lali  words )  one  appeared  on  the  corner  of  the  green  filk  Sarcenet,  by 
the  Mjftical  Stone,She  was  like  a  woman  as  Galvah  in  face,  but  her  apparel  was  a  mans  gown 
flirred  with  foynes,  or,as  Gentlewomen  do  wear  upon  gowns. 

A.  Upon  the  diver/ity  of  your  apparel  we  are  to  ask  whether  you  be  Galvah  or  no'*,  or 
have  you  alfo,as  I  have  done,  put  on  your  Holiday- cloths  ? 

Gal. 


(^  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  J&icns,  mth  fpirits,  (Sec       i  c? 


Gal.  ,„=..  f  E  AR  GOD^ 

E.  K.  She  Aeppech  forward  one  ftcp. 

Gal,  ,5,..,  My  Garment  U  called  H  0  X  M  A  RC  H,  irhkh  in  your  fpeech  is  called 

A.    Initiim  fapie?tt i£eji  Timor  Dowini  :    we  accknowiedge   it  to   be  an   old  and  a  true 
LefTon,  and  alfo  the  firft  ftep  of  the  path-way  to  felicity. 

Gal JFhat  if  fear  ? 

A.   Fear  is  of  two  forts  :   one  i>  called  ;f//<z/i^,  the  other/Vrz'/YAC. 

Gal Vntothe  Jiiji  all  fear  it  joy  5  and  therefore  the  ieginnms,  and  entrance  into  ijuietiteffe. 

true  qtiietnejfe  and  reft  it  tvifdom  ;  For  the  nlmd  that  kjtowethhath  the  greateji  reji  and  quietnefs. 
the  Daughter  of  Vifpaire  unto  the  wickjsd  if  fear. 

this  fear  if  the  firji  that  accufethunto  damnation:  But  he  thxt  is  perfealy  wife,   or  hathtafled 
offpifdoM,  kjioweth  the  End. 

And  hit  fear  if  of  the  thing  that  if  done,  thif  if  the  true  fear  of  God  ;  and  when  rve  fear  fin, 
we  do  it  hecaufe  we  hate  it. 

Whenwe  jiudy  to  dogojd,  it  is  a  tohjn  of  our  fear y  in  that  it  is  a  tok^n  we  fear  him,  whom  vvc 
love  and  for  whofe  honour  we  Jhidy  to  do  Veil- 

this  if  all  that  may  be  [aid  of  lively  and  unlively  fear. 

touching  the  Bool{,  it  Jhall  be  ca.'led  Lo^zh  :  which  in  your   Language  fignifietb  Speech  from  XheXnieoi 
GOD.   If^rite  after  this  fort   L  O  G  A  E  T  H   :   it  if  to  be  founded  Logah .  the  Book. 

77}if  word  if  of  great  fignification,  I  mean  inrefpeB  of  the  profoundnejfe  thereof 

tie  firji  leaf  (as  yot:  call  it^  if  the  lali  of  the  Book-  A.  lunder- 

And  as  the  fir jc  leaf  if  ahotckpt  without  order  ;  So  it  fignifieth  a  diforder  of  the  TVorld,  and  ft^nd  not  this 
Uthefpeechofthat-Diforderov?iop\ytfie.  theSkaf 

Write  the  Book^(  after  your  order  ^  backward,   but  alter  not  the  form  of  letters,   Ij/'f^'^iw  bc.'nw  indeed 
refpeCt  of  the  places.  the  "aft,  is  of 

E.  K.  Now  a  bcame  iliooteth  through  him  from  the  Stone  and  fo  through  heriuh'^one, 
his  head  and  out  of  his  mouth;  his  face  being  from  £•  K.  toward  ^  tiJof'^''^ 

Ifritethe^p.      Ifm  htrve  but  ^%   already.      PFrite  firji  in  a  paper  apart.  .-^ 

E.  Jf.  Said  that  G<r/7'«^  her  head  is  fo  on  bright  firci 

that  it  cannot  be  looked  upon:    The  fire  fo  fparklcch     Lo.tzaeth  fcZ   lovi  hrttic 

andgliftrethas  when  anhot  iron  isfniitten  on  anAn-      r  ^Sl    'j  J„^  ^„^u  /^   /'     j 

vil,  ic  elpecially  at  the  pronouncmg  of  every  word.  It  m     c 

-LJiru  u  ■  rr  Now  Seas  appe-jr. 

IS  to  be  noted  alfo  that  upon  the  pronouncing  of  foqie     ^^„  j,^  ^^„^  ^^^,  ^,,.^^^_^ 

words,  the  Beafts  and  all  Creatures  of  the  World  eve-  >  ••      / 

ry  one  fiiewed  themfelves  in  their  kind  and  form  :  'f  "''*'  ^(^»'PJ^''P  chzr^rvane 
But  notably  all  Serpents,Dragons,Toadsy  and  all  ugly  ^^bcriftacb  lendix  mr  z'andox. 
and  hideous   (hapes  of  beafts ;    which   all  made  moil  (i„i*.,  ■'     / 

ugly  countenances,  in  a  manner  aflaulting  E.  K.  hut  contrariwife  cbming  t6t; ' ¥nfd  fawniiTg 
upon  G a Iv ah.  It  is  to  be  noted  alfo  that  by  degrees  came  a  fecondbeamp,  and  a  third 
beame  of  light  into  G'z/i'/?;tfiom  the  Stone,  and  all  the  three  together  appeared  :  the  third 
participating  of  the  other  two. 

The  fecond  beame  came  at  the  word  Lii>"i, pronounced  ;  when  alfo  Frogs  and  Serpents  ap- 
peared, &c.  The  third  beame  upon  the  word  £xi  pronounced.  Note  alfo,  that  the  man- 
ner of  the  firy  brightneffe  was  fuch,  and  the  grifely  countenances  of  the  A/onfters  was  fo  te- 
dious and  greivous  and  difpleafant  to  £.  K-  that  partly  the  very  grief  of  his  minde  and  body, 
and  partly  the  fufpefting  the  Creature?  to  be  no  good  Creatures^  neither. fuch  greivous 
iights  ncceflary  to  be  exhibited  with  the  Myfteries  delivering  unto  us,  had  in  a  manner  for- 
ced him  to  leave  off  all  :  But  I  again  with  reafonable  exhorting  of  him,  and  partly  the  provi- 
dence and  decree  Divine,  wrought  fome  mitigating  of  his  grief  and  difquietiiig. 

Gal thefe  are  thefe  feven. 

A.  Bleffed  and praifed  for  ever  be  He  who  is  one  and  three  ;  and  whomhiighty  mini- 
fters  or  governours  do  inceflantly  glorifie.  ..:;•■  ;  - 

'"        ,  •       1583. 

Gil,  .,.,„  thy  folly  and  weakjieffe  is  great f  God  C0mfort  thee. 

[a.  Hefpoketo  E.  ^>  for  his  exceflive  difquietnefle  and  fufpefting  ofthe  verity  or 
goodnc/Te  of  Galvah.  ]  . ;  iij,  j, ,;.     ^io'llnsl    ' 

A.  Note.  Now  the  beames  were  all  retired  into  the  ftone  ;  again  likewife  all  the  Crea- 
tures and  Vermine  or  ugly  ftiaped  Bealh  are  all  gone.       We  were  willed  alfo  divers  time's  to 
pray.      At  fund  ry  pangs  of  E.  K.    his  grief  and  difquietnefle,   fundry  fpeeches  were  uttered  *''^5'' 
by  the  fpiritual  Creature  :  among  which  thefe  noted. 

.......  He  that  if  angry  cannot  fee  well.        From  bim  that  is  perverfe,  God  tu^neih  hit  fack   ' 

the  hindrance  of  pumjliment,  is  the  mercy  of  G  d,  which  imputeth  nt  fin  unto  them  whom  uV-"^^  ^"'i^- 
*'?ffcChofen  ;  therefore  be  patient,  and  reconcile  thy  felf  to  God.  tion°"'    *' 

D    2  E'.  K.    °  ' 


20         A  true^elatiotj  ofD'.  Dee  his  ABions.wh  fpirits,  dec, 

- — — m  — ~*— '       '  I 

E.  K-  I  do  it  with  all  humility  and  fincehty  of  mindc,  and  befeechGod 
CO  help  me  with  his  grace;  for  of  my  fclf  I  cannot  do  fo,yet  I  am  Thomas 
Vidymas,  I  yoill  believe  thefe  things,  when  I  fee  the  fruits  of  them, 

h.  He  feenied  yet  again  to  doubt ,  whether  this  Creature  and  the  reft  ,  (partakers  of  this 
aftion)  were  foundly  good,  and  void  of  all  halting,  or  abufing  us. 

E  K.  How  can  youpcrfwademcthatycbenodcludcrs? 

Arjj'iments  to        Gall /  will  prove  it  by  contrary. 

prove  ojr  In-       Jhe  ferva»ts  of  darkjiejfe  have  tkeir  Garments  ftained  :  their  mouths  ftinck^  of  blafphewy  ,  and 
^llf°J^^°^^^  lies,  but  our  Garments  are  no  fuch  i  neither  do  oiir  lips  fpea}{_  any  untruth  :  and  therefore  we  are 
of  God,  for  whofoever  it  of  the  truth,  is  of  God, 

Moreover:,  the  Vevil  is  kjtown  by  hit  works :  for  the  fpirit  of  God  controlleth  them,  tbe  fpirit  of 
God  agreethwith  us, and  ufethno  controlment  again/tit,  therefore  it  it  mtDauleffe, 

Inane  thing  thou  mayeji  know  uf  diffefingjrom  Devils.  ■ 

Mercy.  The  wickjd  fpirits  alwayes  abhor  this  word  Mercy. 

Btit  it  it  the  Doftrine  that  wc  preach  in  refpeH    towards  you,  we  are  not  now  (then)  evil. 
But  thii  way  teacheth  hardneffe,  and  is  a  fiumbling  hloc\  tt  the  wickfd  :  but  the  beauty  of  the  Ca- 
file  is  not  able  to  he  expreffed. 
The  ft-.tirc  be      Happy  are  they,  which  are  covered  with  the  Tear  Is  of  Righteoufnejfe,  and  on  whofe  head  there  is  a 
fore.  Garland  of  godlineffc :  For  unto  thofe  belongeth  to  tajie  of  the  Fountain  of  true  wifdom. 

Is  it  not  written  of  this  book,  that  it  teacheth  nature  in  all  degrees  ? 
The  judgement  hereof  IS  Intelleftual. 
And  wajhyour  feet,  and  follow  vie, 
L.  Lord  wafh  thou  our  feet,,  or  elfe  we  fhall  not  be  clean. 

Gal! How  thou  art  God  kjwweth  :  But  comfort  your  felves  in  this. 

This  Teftimo-      That  neither  this  Teftimony  can  perirti,  neither  unto  you  can  remain  any  flavery  :  $luia  w 
ny  viftory.      ftfo.  erit  vi£ioria,  in  him,  and  for  him,  to  whom  I  leave  you. 
A,  What  fliall  I  do  with  thefe  21  words  now  received ; 

Gall There  are  onely  the  words  of  the  firft  leaf. 

A.  I  pray,  how  fliall  I  beftow  them,  or  place  them.  • 

Gall In  them  is  the  Divinity  of  tbe  Trinity, 

The  firft  leaf  Ihe  Myflerie  of  our  Creatian, 

«f  the  book.  The  age  of  many  years. 

And  the  conclufion  of  the  World, 

Of  nu  they  are  honoured,  but  of  me,  not  to  be  uttered :  Neither  did  I  difclofe  them  Myfelf:  For, 
\hey  are  the  beams  of  my  underjianding,  and  the  Fountain  from  whence  I  water. 
A.   I  bcfeech  you,  how  fliall  I  write  thefe  names  in  the  firft  leafe. 

Gall They  are  to  be  written  in  5  Tables,  in  every  Table  21  Letters. 

A.  How  ftiall  I  place  the  $  Tables  upon  two  fides :  three  in  the  firft,  and  2  in  the  fecond,  or 
one  in  the  firft,  and  4  in  the  fecond,  or  how  elfe? 

Gall Asthoufeejicaufe. 

A.  Shall  I  write  them  in  Letters  of  Gold? 

Gall The  writing  hath  been  referred  to  thy  difcretion  with  colleurs  ,  an^uch  things  as  ap- 

prtain  to  the  writing  thereof.  Vpon  the  firjl  fide  write  three  Tables,  and  on  the  fecond  two, 
A.  How,  thus?    n:r:    Gal.  ....  Set  them  down,  I  will  direlf  thy  judgement. 
A.  When, now?    lrL~    Gal Not  now. 

E.K.  She  is  gone, 

A.  Deo  Nofirofit  Lauf,honor,&  Gratiarum  aUioperennis.  Amen. 

JFednefday  19.    Junii.  Hora  2.  a  Meridte, 

A,  I  made  a  prayer  to  God  :  and  there  appeared  one,  having  two  Garments  in  his  hands, 
who  anfwered. 


p  •    • 


A  good  praife,  with  a  wavering  minde. 
A.  God  make  my  mindc  ftable,  and  to  be  feafoned  with  the  intclieftual  leaven,  free  of  all 
fcnfible  mutability. 

E.  K.  One  of  thefe  two  Garments  is  pure  white :  the  other  is  fpeckled  of 
divers  colours  i  he  layeth  them  down  before  him,  he  layeth  alfo  a  fpeckled 
Cap  down  before  him  at  hii  feet  j  he  hath  no  Cap  on  his  head :  his  hair  is 
long  and  yellow  ,  but  his  face  cannot  be  feen  •■>  it  the  leaft  it  was  turned 
away-ward  from  E-k.  continually,  though  e.  k.  changed  his  place. 

Teu 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  Jettons,  mth  fpirits,  <3cc»        21 

Joujha/l  fee  my  face,  loy  it  is  white. 

E.  K.  Now  he  putteth  on  his  Pitfd  Coat,  and  his  Pied  Cap, he  cafteth  the 
one  fide  of  his  Gown  over  his  (houlder,  and  he  danccth,  and  faith, 

.  .  .  . ,  There  is  x  Gody  let  in  be  merry. 

E.K.  He  danceth  ftill. 

"there  is  a  henveny  let  ut  he  merry. 

Doth  this  Do&rine  teach  you  to  kfjov  Gody  or  to  be  skjlfull  in  the  heavens  ? 

Note  it. 

E.  K.  Now  he  putteth  ofFhis  Cloathcs  again :  Now  he  kneeleth  down, and 
waCfieth  his  head  and  his  neck,  and  his  face,  and  fliaketh  his  Cloaths,  and 
plucketh  off  the  uttermoft  fole  of  his  fliooes,  and  fallcth  proftrate  on  the 
ground,  and  fayed .- 

Vou'hfafe  (0  God')   to  takf  arvay  the  vearineffe  of  tHy  bodyy  and  to  cleanfe  the  filthinejfe 

of  this  dufiy  that  J  may  be  apt  for  this  pnreneffe. 

E,  K  Now  he  taketh  the  white  Garment,  and  putteth  it  on  him, 

Mighty  h  God  in  hit  great  Jujiicey  and  wonderful  in  his  imme  afar  able  ni-rry  :  The  hea- 
vens tajie  of  hii  Glory  :  Ihe  earth  is  confounded  at  his  wifdom.  In  hell  they  tremble  at  him,  a:  at 
a  Revenger.  Th'sjheweth  thee  (  O  )  tobe  a  Gody  and  firetcheth  forth  thy  Glory  from  the  Eaii  unto 
the  Wtji  ;  for  thy  Heavens  are  Statutesy  and  thy  Creatures  Laws  :  that  thou  ntayai  be  accounted 
aGodof  JulHceandGlory.  Becaufe  thou  art  a  God,  Therefore  there  is  a  Heaven  :  F^runto 
the  Frince  cf  Kighteoufne^'y  there  belongeth  a  place  of  Glory ;  Into  the  which  there  enter eth  none 
that  are  defiled  y  neither  fuch    as    are    fc/eJMz/^fi^  with  the  fpots  of  iniquity.   M<mus  H£C  bona 

efi E.  K.  putting  forth  his  right  hand,  H£C  Autem  mala    £.  K.  putting  forth  his 

left  hand,   ^i  Habet  aures  intelligat. 

E.  K.  Now  he  litrctb  down  on  the  Desk-top  and  lookeih  toward  me* 

A.  This  Parable  is  in  general^  foniewhat  underftood  of  us  :  but  in  particular,  how  it  may- 
be, or  is  to  be  applied,  prefently  we  underftand  not, 

Beware  left  error  enter  within  the  dwelling  place  of  Righteoufneffe.  I  have  f aid. 

E.  K.  Hw  fcemeth  now  to  be  turned  to  a  woman,  and  the  very  fame 

which  we  call  Gdhah. 
E.  K.  Now  he  is  come  down  to  the  ufual  place,  on  the  Table. 

L.  I  have  affaycd  divers  wayes  to  place  the  five  Tables,  on  the  two  fides  on  this  firft  leaf ; 
Is  it  to  your  likeingas  I  have  done  it,  in  the  five  little  Triangles  ? 

Gal As  concerning  tkefetting  down  of  the  five  Tables,  it  is  fufficient  as  it  is  done. 

The  caufe  why  1  appeared  thus,  was  that  you  might  avoid  error. 

A.  I  pray  you  to  iTiew  us  the  means  how  that  error  was  or  is  to  incumber  us. 

Gal Whofoever  taketh  fervantsof  the  wicked,  to  prove  the  Glory  of  God  ,  is  ac-     Note. 

curfed.    B«f,  0  Satan,  how  many  are  thy  deceits  ? 

Note,  my  Companion  (  E.  iC.  )  would  have  caufed  perfonal   apparitions  of  fonie  of  the 
reproba.e  fpirits,  before  the  Prince  Albert    Laskie  in  my  Study,  thereby  to  fhew    (ome  ex-    ^,  £;, 
perience  of  his  skill  in  fuch  doings;   But  I  would  not  confent  to    it:  And  thereupon  G  (J /i"^^ 
gave  judgement  and  warning  of  fuch  an  error,  of  my  Companion  his  intent,  &c. 

Gal Beholdy  ititfaid,  before  he  go  front  hcwe  I  will  pour  w.iter  into  hi^i ;  And  my  An~ 

gel  (hall  annoint  hiwy  as  I  have  determined  :  Hidetherefore  Nothing  from  him;  Foryou  be-  Notcof>I.£. 
long  unto  him.     Neither  can  flejh  and  bloodwork.  thofe  things  that  I  have  Glorified  in  hiM  (All 
things  that  are  ejiablijhed  in  God,  are  Glorified.    I  fpeak^thit  for  thy  vnderjianding')  Neith<r  let 
your  hearts  he hurdnedi    for  the  Earth  ii    condemned,  and  thefc  things  (hall  come  to  pafle. 
Credit  is  all  that  Ifeek  {faith  the  Lord;  )  for  when  I  come,  I  (hall  be  fufftcient/y  believed.  ^^  ^^^j, 

I  takj  the  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth  to  judge;  and  fw  ear  by  him  as  awitneffe,t\iaxt.\\dc  wom-; 
are  true,  and  ftall  endure  unto  the  end.      The  general  points  of  mans  Sahation  arc  concluded  al-  Note  of  Gene- 
ready  ;  but  tfie  fpecial  gift  belongeth  unto  God.        God  jirengthen  you  a^ainji  his  adverfary.  r*'clal"7fH°*' 

A.   Amen.  ^'^  *  ^'  "' 

Gal Soenyou  (l>a II know  more. 

A.  This  Prince  would  gladly  know,  Whether  it  fhall  be  beft  for  hinj,  with  the  firft  oppor- 
tunity ,to  be  going  homeward. 

Gal Itjfiall  be  anfwered  foony  and  what  queftions  foever  he  alfo  demandeth, 

A.   May  he  behere  prefent  at  theaftiondoing  ? 

Gal Thofe  that  are  of  this  h'ufe,  are  not  to  be  denied  the  Banquets  therein.  "1-ef  m'"'^ 

A.  May  I  requeft  you  to  caufe  fome  fenfible  apparition  to  appear  to  him,  to  comfort  him,  ^^j^n," 
and  eftablifti  his  minde  more  abundantly  in  the  godly  intent  of  God  his  Service  > 

Oal. 


21     J  true'J^elatmo/  D'\I)cchis  jBions^mthJpirits,d^c, 

Gal If  jiou  follow  US3  let  him  be  governed  by  in  i  But  whatfoever  it   of  the  flelh,  is  not 

■    of  us. 

E,K.  Shefeemeth  to  wesp  ;  forihe  water  com cth  forth  of  her  eyes. 

A.  Yen  perceive,  how  he  underftandeth  of  the  Lord  Treafurer  his  grudge  againft  him  ; 
And  perhaps  fome  other  alfo,  are  of  likernalitious  nature  :  What  danger  may  follow  hereof, 
or  incombrance  ? 

Gal thefim  of  his  life  is  already  appointedy  one  jot  cannot  be  diminijhed  :   But  he  that 

A  L.  poverty,   ii  Almighty  can  augment  at  his  pie  a  fur  e.      Let  him  re'pyce  in  poverty.       Be  forry  for  his  ene- 
mies.      And  do  the  workj  of  Jujiice. 

E.K.  Shefeemeth  to  put  the  air  over  her,  and  foto  enter  into  a  Cloud 
of  invifibility,  and  fo  dilappear- 

A.  Deogratias  agamuf. 

TVenfday  after  noin,  circa  horam  5.     T^he  Lord  Albert  a  Lasky  being  prefent, 

A.  We  attended  oiGalvah  fome  inftruftions  or  difcourfe  concerning  the  Lord  Laskje. 

E.  K.  At  length  appeared  before  the  Lord  Laiky  ( in  the  air)  an  Angel  in 
a  vvhits  Robe,  holding  a  bloody  Crofle  in  his  right  hand,  the  fame  hand 
being  alfo  bloody. 

A.  In  n.mine  Jefu  Chrifti  Crucifixi^a  te  reqviro  qui  Grucis  Troph£um  hie  Gefiasut  ilia  nobis 
f'gn/fies,  qu^funt  ad  Chrijit  gloriaWy  cuifit  honor  &  Lain  perennis. 

E.  K-   Now  he  ii  come  from  before  the  Lord  Lasky ^  and  ftandcth  here 

on  the  Table :  he  turncth  himfclf  to  all  the  four  quarters  of  the  World; 

hekncelethdown. 

He  prayeth. 

0  God,  Why  jhould  the  people  upon  earth  re'joyce  ?  or  wherein  Jhould  the  pleafnresof  their 

fenfual  delights  be  fixed  /  Why  doth  the  Moon  hold  her  comfe  ?  or  why  are  the  Stars  obferving  art 
order?  Why  are  thy  people  thus  Jrattercd  abroad  ?  Bicahfe  iniquity  hath  caught  the  upper  hand. 
The  Doors  of  our  God  are  polluted  with  blafvhemy  ,  his  Temples  defolate,  his  Commandfnettts  vio- 
lated y^ndh'i^  Glory  sccoutited  as  nothing.  But  wilt  thou  fuffer  ;  or  canjl  thou  hold  thy  hand 
from  thy  great  and  tnighty^  Jtrokjs  t  Moji  High  God,  Mojt  Mighty  God,  Mefi  Honourable  God, 
have  mercy  upon  thy  people ;  refped  the  Creation,  (  the  Creation  I  fay  )  of  thofe,  wherein  thou  hajl 
delighted.  Siffer  not  the  Serpent  to  extol  his  head  above  thy  Altars,  neither  let  thy  holy  Veffelte 
poifoned  with  his  venome.  For  thou  art  Mighty  and  overcomeji  all:  and  who  can  rebel  againfi 
thy  Prowejfe  ?  Bend  down  thy  mereiful  eyes.  Behold  this  confufitn :  look^upon  thy  "temple  and  fee 
the  defolation  thereof.  And  then  in  thy  mercy  (  0  ')jl}ew  thy  felfto  be  a  God,  and  fuch  a  merciftd 
Governour,  as  hath  compafjion  upon  thofe  that  are  difeafedt  yea  even  unto  death.  Grant  this  Catna- 
fcheth  galfuagath  garnaftel  zurah  logaah  luferoth.    Amen. 

A,   I  pray  you  to  declare  unto  us  your  name. 

My  name  is  Jubaniadace. 

A.  If  I  (hould  not  offend  yon,  I  would  gladly  know  of  what  order  you  are, or  how  your 
lUte  is  in  refpeft  o( Michael,  Gabriel,  Raphael,  or  Vriel. 

Jub.  Vnto  men,  according  unto  their  deferts,  and  the  firjl  excellency  of  their  Soul,  God 

hath  appointed  a  good  Governour  or  Al^ge\,  from  amongll  the  orders  of  thofe  that  are  Blejfed : 
For  every  Soul  that  is  good,  is  not  of  one  and  the  f elf  fame  dignification  ;  Therefore  according  to  hif 
excellency  we  are  appointed  as  Minijhrs  from  that  order,  whereunto  his  Excellency  accordeth  :  To 
the  intent  that  he  may  be  brought  at  laji  to  fupply  thofe  places  which  were  Glorified  by  a  former  ; 
And  alfo  to  the  intent,  that  the  Prince  of  Darkjieffe-niight  be  counterpoifed  in  Gods  Jujiice.  A- 
7»ongli  the  which  I  am  one  which  am.the  Keeper  and  t)cfender  of  this  man  prefent  ;  which  carry 
the  Triumph  and  Enfign  of  Vidories  continually,  before  him,  as  a  reproach  to  my  adverfaries  and 
his,  a^td  to  confirm  the  dignity  whereunto  he  is  called  by  the  prefence  of  this  Charafter. 

£.  K.  Now  he  heavcth  up  the  CrofTe. 

I  have  alfo  fealed  the  fame  m  his  heart :    For  unto  him  belong  great  Viftories  ,  in 

the  name,  and  for  the  name  of  his  God.  The  Jews  in  his  time  (hdW  tifie  of  this  Creffe  :  And 
with  this  CrofTe  (hall  he  overcome  the  Sarazens,  and  Paynims  :  For  I  will  ejiabajhone  Faith 
(  frith  the  Lord  of  Jujiice  )  That  I  may  be  kjiown  to  be  the  fame  that  I  was  firfi  among  all  people. 
CMoreover  I  will  open  the  hearts  of  all  men,  that  he  may  have  free  paffage  throrghthem,  and  will 
not  fuffer  hint  to  periffj  with  the  vioUnce  of  the  wickfd.  I  will  hereafter  vilibly  appear  unto  him, 
andwill  fay,  Thisis  to  be  done.  But  a  year  isnot  yet  come,  and  theft  things Jhall.be  finijhed. 
But  (jhus  faith  the  Lord)  I  have  hindrcd  him,  becaufe  he  hearkjted  to  the  provocation  of  thofe  that 
are  wdtnon.        And  hathconi^ented  to  thofe  that  blafphemed  my  name.        Bid  him  lool^to  the 

Jieps  of  his  youth,  and  meafure  the  length  of  his  body;  to  the  intent,he  may  live  better,  and  fee  himr 

felf  inwardly. 

A.  Note. 


A.   L. 
Jucliti. 
Vinor'ts. 

A.  L. 


A.  L. 
f  n  year  to 
come. 
Hindrance 
brcedeth  ex- 
ception; ard 
fin  brctd^th 
hinJrante. 


<t4  true  Relation  of  jy^  Dee  his  ABions  with  fpirits,  (Sec.       2  ^ 


A.   Note.    At  this  Inftanc  Tjnfeld  came  lailily  upon  us,  into  my  Study  .-  we  thinkini^  that 
the  Study  door  had  been  fhut ;   the  Lord  Laskje  being  gone  out  of  my  Study,  tlie  orher 
way  through  my  Oratory,   to  take  Taufdds  nieHagc  from  the   Court ,  and  havint^  dif- 
patched  him,  rcfted  without :  and  T.r,ifeld  having  commendations  to  mcjas  he  faid,  from  TW:%-^an'eli 
fome  at  London.,  fearing  leaft  he  (hould  be  be  fent  away  by  and  by,  without  doing  thefe  Co  vcd  ■h.. 
camcundifcretly  upon  us,    to  our  no  little  amazing,  and  great  fcarin,';  his  ra(h  opinion  ^^'"1  ^-^t'. 
afterward  of  fuch  things,  as  he  could  not  perceive  perfeftly  what  my  Companion  and  1 
were  doing:    Hereupon,  y7/i<i?z/a^<rcf  gave  this  fentence,   or  declared  this  the  fatal  end 
of  Tanfeld. 

Juban It  is  [aid,  Hethat  entreth  iathiK  rajhlyy  Lofive  tnoneths  arejettocome^andfijhes 

tfthe  Seafi>all  divoiirhis  cark.^fe. 

Ai  pe^ore,  whatfoever  he  takcth  in  hzndpall profper,  for  my  names  fake.     For  thus  it  4,  l.  his  m- 

is  faidi  and  thefe  words  are  the  words  wherewithii!  I  do  annoint  him ;    for  than  the  comfort  of  the  nointli  r 
Higbejii  there  is  not  a  fweeter  Inundiion.       Look^  not  for  the  marvciles  c/ t/;ij /^or/^,  as  the '^'""x'"'^ 
wielded  man  in  his  heart  doth;  but  jtudy  to  pleafehimwitb  whom  ye  migh'-  rejoyce  for  ever.      Ja// ''»"'' "°V""' 
fons  ofmeHi  ^''^-^f  do  ye  feek^  after?      Vo  ye  hmt  after  the  fwiftnejfe  of  the  winds  ;  or  are  you  ^""'^'"' '''"'' 
imagining  a  form  unto  the  Clouds  ?   cr  goye forth  to  hear  the  braying  0/  an  Jffe^  which  puffHh  away 
vith  the  fwiftneffe  of  the  air  ?     Seek,  for  true   wifdont ;  For  tt   beholdeth  tbebrighteji,  and  ap~ 
feareth  unto  the  lowef.        Cecill  hatethhim  unto  the  heart,  and  defiretb  he  were  gone  hence.  Muny  -p, 
other  do  privily  fting  at  him  ;   I  cannot   properly  fay  jling  him  ;   But  ( I  fay  )  I  wi  'I  four  down  my  XreafJ^e^ 
wrath  upon  the»t,  and  they  Jhallbe  confounded  in  the  midji  of  their  own  iniquity.    Let  my  faithful 
live  and  belike  the  fruithtl  Vi-'{)ard.      Be  itfo. 

it.  For  his  return  homeward,  What  is  your  advice  ?  perhaps  he  wanteth  Jieceffary  pro- 
vifion,  and  money. 

Jutan He  pall  he  holpen  here,  and  elfewhere  ,  rairaculoufly.       Ifpeak^as  it  were  to  him- 

felf.      Let  him  S.o,fo  f^on  as  he  can  conveniently. 

L.  I  fay  again,  perhaps  he  wanteih  money,  but  the  Treafures  of  the  Lord  are  not  fcanr, 
tothemwhom  hefavoureth. 

Jub His  help  Ihall  he  firange  which  hath   not  been   often  feen.      Ihe  ^Jieenlnveth  him 

faithfully,  and  bath  fallen  out  withCccW  about  him  :   Lecefter  fiattereth  him.      His    doings  are 
loekjd  into  narrowly.      But  I  do  alwayes  inwardly  direct  him^  and  I  vriil  minilhr  fuch  comfort 
untobim,asfhallbeneceffaryinthemidjiofallhtsdou!gs.     When  this  Country  fhall  be  inva- p    i    j 
ded,  then  fliallyou  palie  into  his  Country,  and  by  this  means,fliall  his   Kingdom  be  eftabli"    "^*"  ' 
flied  again.        This  is  more  then  my  duty.        This  is  the  fir ji  time  he  hath  been  here,  and  it  is  won-      a     t 
derful.      The  fccond  coming  is  not  long  unto,  and  then  ftiall  he  be  wonderfiil,      Dejiitutus 
i  me,  premitur  i  malo.        He  is  now  dejiitute  of  me. 

tk.  Note,  as  foon  as  he  had  faid  this  fentencc,  he  feemed  to  fink  through  the  Table  like  a 
fpark  of  fire  ;  and  feemed  to  make  hafte  to  his  Charge,!  mean  the  Lord  Laskje  :  whereby  we 
perceive  the  frailty  of  man  to  be  great  when  he  is  Dejiitute  (yea  but  after  this  manner  )  o/ 
this  good  Angel. 

BenediBum  fit  nomen  Dei  nofiri  nunc 
^infsmpiternaf£cula.  Amen, 

Thurfday  20  Junii  1583.  After  Noonc  Circa  6. 

Gal Labour  in  the  writing  of  this  Book^diligently.       See  thou  cleanfe  thy  felf  oji  both  fides. 

Be  ahne  while  it  is  done  :  that  is  to  fay,  whle  thou  art  in  doing  it,  henceforth  and  till  the  time 

come  ufefpeecb  with  us  no  more  ;  every  feventh  day  accepted.  "  Every  feventF! 

A.  How  Hiall  thofe  dayes  be  accounted  ?  day. 

Gal Fromtuefdaylajt:    Tuefday  being  the  firji  of  the  feven,  and  the  next  Munday,  the  ^°'^^*''"'  ■ 

feventh,    and  fo  forth  every    (Monday  is    the  feventh.      In  a  pure  aCti.n  all  things  ought  to  be 
Jure. 

A.   May  I  be  writing  every  day,  and  at  any  time,  when  it  fliall  come  in  my  mind  ? 

Gal F-ver  as  thou  (halt  feel  me  move  thee.       I  will  ft ir  up  thy  delire.  Good  defi-cs 

A.   How  (hall  I  do  for  the  letters  ?  Shall  I  fimply  tranflate  the  letteii  as  I  find  them  ?  fti'^red  up  by 

Gal.  ......  J.  good  Angels. 

A.  The  titles  of  the  fides,are  they  to  be  written  onely  in  the  holy  Chara  fters  ? 

Gal As  thoufayeji,  even  thofe  Words  do  make  the  holy,  that  thou  calleji  them  holy i 

A.   I  believe  verily,  that  ti  ey  are  holy  and  fanftified. 

Gal Inthelaii  feven  of  the  ^Q  dayes,   the  vvords  of  this  Baok  fhal!  bediftinguifhed.  D'ftinSfomf 

A.  Knd  accented  SiMo''.  Gal /.  words  and  ac- 

A.  How  fhall  I  do, for  the  Tableswhere  certain  letters  are  to  be  written  in  all  the  void  ^^""' 
places,  feeing  they  will  not  jiiftly  agree  ? 

Gal Inhere  is  one  fuperfluouf  :   it  is  to  be  filled  in  order  as  it  (heweth. 

A,  I  (hall  not  dare  adventure  on  it  without  direftion  when  I  come  to  it, 

Ga! Thou  Jhalt  want  no  d-reaion. 

A.  For  the  inequality  of  the  firft  49  lines  I  require  your  advife. 

Gal. 


14         A  trueKelation  of  I>.  Dee  his  JSions  wh  fpirits^  <5cc. 


Gal It  is  no  quefiion. 

Gall TJyou  heginneft  in  thevporld  toloo\vp  tohtaven  :    Soypof  it  begun   in  earth  to    hoJ{, 

up  to  the  doing  ubdije. 

The  laft  life  is  Hotclipotcli  of  the  wicked  in  the  Woild,  and  damned  in  theUcW. 

potchW.'         E.  K..  What  is  a  Hotchpotch, &c- 

To  E  K  '  '        Gal.  .  . . ,  ■   *?'•'(■  gre.rter  tky  folly  if,  the  greater  thy  w/fdom  will  he  hereafter. 

There  are  the  Souls  of  the  wicked  and  damned  in  Hell.        Tbofe  that  an  in  the  world 

cannot  dtfri'  e  the  'calf  joy  of  thofe  that  are  in  heaven  :  Much  lejfe  thofe  that  are  ignorant y  declare 
the  wavifeliheaiity  of  ypifloni.  There  (hall  come  a  day  with  joU)  when  yon  Jhall  rejoyce.  In  the 
wean  feafon,  rent  your  hearts,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord. 

A.  Deus  in  adjutoriiim  noftrum  intende^Domine  ad  jnvandum  mc  feftinajGlo- 
lia  Patrij&i  filio,8i-  S,6v-     Amen. 

Satnixhy,  ante  Meridiem.  //or<r  lo.  Junii  22. 

A.  Whiles  I  was  writing  certain  prayers  to  good  Angels,  and  ad  proprios  nofiros  Angelos  for 
^.L'f.'^jjthere  appeared  one  very  big  m  the  aire,  all  in  a  white  Garment  fullof  plaights ,  and 
tucked  up  verj'  dubble,  with  a  niyterlike  Attire  on  his  head, and  acrofTeon  the  forepart  of  it; 
He  Willed  E.  K.  to  fpeak^  to  me,  and  to  tell  me  of  hk  being  there  :  But  he  refufed,  and  exprefly  de- 
nied it,  partly  by  reafon  Galluah  faid  that  he  would  not  deal  with  us,  but  every  feventh  day 
(being  every  Monday)  till  the  aftions  vveie  ended  :  and  therefore  he  fuppofed  this  Creature 
tobe  an  illuder,  and  partly  he  urged  fome  evident  token,  or  proof  of  their  well-meaning  to- 
wards us  in  Aft,d^r.  He  went  down,  and  ftill  this  Creature  followed  hun  with  a  drawn  fwordy 
requiring  him  to  declare  thefc  words  to  me  ;  but  E.K>  a  ioivg  while  bad  him  declare  them 
himfelf  imto  me,  if  he  would  :  and  faid,  why  flieuld  he  not,c^c.  At  length  my  Companion 
came,  appeafed,  and  contented  to  hear  what  this  Creature  would  fay  ,  who  at  length  faid 
thus: 

....  The  Eagles  have  food  for  their  yomtg  ones,hy  Divine  providence  ,  and  not  of  themfelves. 

fe.K.  w»?yet   j^0yd  lit  me  diminijh  the  power  of  this  wick/d  fpirit  that  doth  fo  provoke  ,  and  fiirre  him  to  mi-' 

fomcwhit.c-  ^^^-^j^ 

BOTt"  modiliy       •  •  •  •  ^f  ^^^  ^'^^  "f  *^^  fathers  (0  God)  he  great  towards  their  Children,  much  greater  are  thy 
this  creatures   bleffings  in  thofe  whom  thou  hajl  ch^fen, 
gooduiords.  A.   So,  (O  Lord)  fo. 

«...  'Behold,  I  will  draw  threds  together,  and  mal^e  hint  a  Net,  which  Jhall  alwayes  be  between 
Now  he  came  ^^^  ^^^^  j^^  Adverfary  :  neither  Jhall  it  diminifh  hit  under  \ianding  from  the  true  fight  of  me. 
he  Tared  Vo-^'  ^^  ^'^^^^  ^^^'^  /""'^  '  ^^^  place  is  holy.  JFrnte  that  Jhall  be  here  fpoken  ,  with  devotion  upon 
wards  my  thy  kjtees.  Great  it  thy  name  (0  God)  and  mighty  art  thou  in  all  thy  workings :  Thy  help  it  jirong 
weft-fide,  and  to  thofe  that  delight  therein.  0  magnified  be  thy  nii-me  from  generation  to  generation. 
came  and  /-^      • 

ftoodbymy....  .     Oratio. 

on  the  Table.  Speritu  &  mentc  dico, 

Hecovereth         Sit  mihi  venis  orandi  modus :  nam  bonitatem  Dei  Laudo  :  O,  Iram  Patrisnieritus  fum,  quia 
his  face.  lumen  ejus  elongatur  a  me:  Verum  in  nomine  Chrifti  remifTiontm  deliftorum  meorum,  8c  con- 

Now  he  pray-  firmationem  in  fuo  Sanfto  Spiritu  cxopto.    Per  te,  Halleluja,  refurgam,  meaccufo,  me  con- 
eth  fomewhat  demno  :  omnia  male  feci, 

in  his  own  Omnia  per  te  (Pater)  funt.  Paratus  cftoexaudire.  Oculosad  Coelos  Elevarenolo,  egcfta- 
hj"^Vi^r  I.  ten'"l"i3  nieam  nofti.  Qiiid  differesDomine  ,  Cor  meum  in  melius  Confortere?  Vivus  & 
roftratc'"  non  mortuusfum:  Igitur  Credo  in  te.  Exaudi  me  Antidotum  mihi  SanSum  monftra  ,  quia 
N  th  t'  ev  .  '"^'""^  meum  agnofco.  Mitte  mihi  auxilium  tuum  de  fede  Majeljatis  tu2  :  Et  per  Angelos 
ry  fentencebe  t'onostuereme.  ^W7,E;c/r?<<^/,  O  tu  igitur  Angelus  mens  adfis  mihi.  Defende  me  ,  ncc  trade 
ufed,  feme  di-  Corpus  &  animam  meam  in  manus  inimicorum ;  meorum  fed  fecundum  magnam  mifencordiam 
ftinainthe  Dei,  (per  potcftatcm  tibi  traditam)me  protege, adfit  mecum  prudentia  tua,qua  Diabolum  8c 
bowing  of  his  Sathanicam  fraudem  vincani.    Adjuva  me  dereliitum,  Confirma  me  debilem,  Cura  me  fanuni, 

nl.T.  11"^  fana  me  aegrotum  :  Mihi  eJto  fpiritus  fuper  humanam  fapientiam.     Fac  me  fidclem  Operato- 
proltrate,  or  aji  a  i         i     ^     <■      t       ■  rr     ,-       rt  ■  ■         i         -  o 

holding  uphis  rem  :  Adduc  tecum  Angelos  de  Coclis  demiuos  Sanctos,  qui  me  tecum  in  adveruj  tueantur  86 

hands,&c.       ab  omni  Cuftodiant  malo,  donee  ilia  hora  venerit  ,  quam  nemo  evitare  poteft  :  Suftinuit  aninia 

He  holdeth     niea  in  verbo  ejus.    Amen. 

hl*h     "^"      GlorifieGodye  fans  of  men  ,and  praife  him  in  the  midil  of  your  wickedneffe  :  For  he  is  a  God 

'^  '  thatjheweth  mcrcie  to  his  people,  and  heholdeth  th  fe  that  are  affiiHed  :  All  honour,  praife,  and  glo~ 

ry  be  unto  him,  n;w  and  for  ever.  Amen. 

A.    I  befeech  you,  what  is  your  name,  that  this  mcrcie  of  God  may  be  Recorded  ,  to  have 

been  beftowed  upon  us  by  yom-  miniftcry. 

....   Gabriel, 

A.  Shall  I  fignifieto  the  Polonian  Gentleman,  that  wc  received  this..  .  .  prayer  from  you, 

and  fo  make  him  partner  thereof* 

Gabriel. ...  Do  fo. 

Ihe 


fiJ  true  Relation  of  jy^  Dee  his  ABions  whffirits,  6cc.       2  ^ 


"the  help  cf  the  Lrd  is  with  thofe,  that  he  loveth^  anAfo  be  it. 

A.  He  made  the  fi^n  of  a  CroUe  over  our  two  heads,  and  fo  went  away. 

Gloria  fit  in  excelfisy  Deo  mjho  &  in  terra.  Pax  hominibui  bona  voluntatis. 
Amen. 

Siturdayj  Jmii  22.  a  Meridie,  Circa  6. 

A,  Upon  the  pending  and  examining,  this  prayer  G'tbriel  revealed  unto  us,  I  found  certain 
imperfections,  and  fome'doubts,  wherein  we  thought  it  good  to  ask  counfel,  and  require  G<r- 
briePs  advife  :  That  the  prayer  might  be  perfeft,as  he  might  well  like  of  to  Gods  honour  and 
our  comforts.  At  the  length  :  Nothing  appearing  to  the  eye,  but  the  noife  of  a  found  about 
E.  K.  his  head,  and  withall  a  mighry  weight  ,  or  mvilible  burden  on  his  right  ftioulder  ,  as 
he  fate  in  the  green  Chair,by  the  holy  Table,or  place :  And  unto  certain  places  of  the  prayer, 
which  I  noted  and  repeated, thofe  words,  and  anfwers  were  by  G^zirie/ given. 

Gab.  .,  ..Jhe  Preface  niuji  be  in,  for  if  our  hearts  be  not  prepared  unto  prayer  jOur  prayers  are 
in  vain. 

Quid  differs  Domine,  Cor  meum  in  melius  Comfortarc, 

Per  te  &  in  nomine  tuo  reflirganj ;  id  eft,  Halleluja. 

The  firii  way  is  myre  effeCtual.  Say  Angele  race ,  but  the  other  is  more  effeSualy  Cura  me 
fanuni.    Regard  me,  and  look^unto  me,  beingwhole. 

A.  As  concerning  the  infcription,  which  I  have  written  before  the  prayer  :  I  would  gladly 
know,  whether  it  be  to  your  well  liking  of  it. 

Gab Fiant  omnia  ad  laudem  Dei.      My  doings  are  of  no  fuch  regard  :  What  I  have  done 

he  it  dene,  fo  that  your  additions  be  to  the  honour  of  God^it  is  fufficient.  The  efFeft  of  his  prayer 
is  greater,  then  is  the  form.  The  former  is  greater  then  the  forming.  That  is  to  fay,  he  that 
bath  formed  it,  is  mightier  then  any  virtue,  wherein  it  is  formed.  Wherefotver,  therefore  the  mind 
formethit  with  you  with  perfe^  humility  and  confent,  there  is  alfo  the  former.  As  formed  of  him 
therefore,  I  leave  you  to  the  end  of  his  workjnanjhij)  ,  which  continually  formeth  all  things  according 
to  his  own  fajhion. 

Sins Your  fins  have  banijhed  me,  from  faying  thofe  things  I  would. 

A.    O  cleanfe  our  hearts,  and  wafh  away  our  lins,  amplius  lava  me  ab  iniquitate  mea  &  a  pec-  ■" 

cato  meo  mimda  me. 

Gab Sins  are  never  wafhed  away,  or  forgotten  with  the  higheji  ,  but  with  fuch  as  are  forry, 

and  alfo  make  facisfaftion.  Satisfaaion. 

0  Lird,  full  forry  I  am  for  my  fins,  ani  what  fatisfa^ion  is  ...  required  I  would  gladly  kjiow> 

Gab The  offence  was  not  thine.     Every  one  mi.li  fatisfie,  or  elfe  he  fhall  be  damned. 

A.   Good  Lord  expoimd  to  us  the  myflery  of  fatisfaftion. 

Gab When  the  Soul  ofendeth  ,  and  is  cbnfenting  to  wickfdnejfe ,  he  is  then  to  makj  a  fpiri~ 

tual  fatisfa&ion,  which  is  the  end  and  perfeU  fruit  of  Contrition.     For  thofe  that  are  truely  Con' 
trite,  do  true ly  fatisfie.     Another  fatisfaUion  there  is, which  is  externil.     This  fatisfa&ion  is  to 
he  made  for  fins  committed  againji  thy  Neighbour  :  For  if  thou  offend  thy  Neighbour  ,  and  do  him 
Vrong,  or  takjf  any  thing  fiom  him,  by  fraud,  or  violence.,  it  is  a  great  fin .  For  this,  thou  canji  never 
be  Contrite  if  thou  make  not  fatisf action,  not  onely  confefjing  it,  but  in  fatisfyinz  his  defire  that  is 
offended,  and  that  with  forrow.    This  is  true  Voilrine,  and  (hall  never  be  cvertlsrown^by  the  fpirits     NOTE. 
of  ftilfe  invention  :  which  indeed  is  the  firji  eye  unto  the  Devil.      If  you  may  offend  your  brother  ,  and  ^°°'l  Angels 
I,    .    he  therefore  accurfed  :  How  much  more  fhall  you  be  accurfed,  when  yon  offend  the  meffager  of  him"''^°^'^"^^^ 
I'        thatisytur  Father.     Behold,  hefiyethnot,  I  have  cnce  done  amiffe.  God  be  mercifull  to  you,  that^^''"^"'^^'^' 
his  mercies  might  be  the  greater  uponym.      Be  mindfull  of  ntyfayings.  ^'  ^' 

A.  Deus  mifereatur  noftri  ,  &  benidicat  nobis,  Cor  raundum  Greet  in  nobis,&:  fpi- 
rituni  reftum  ponat  in  proecordiis  noftris,  Amen, 

1583- 

Wedncfday,  Junii  26.  Hora  p;.  prafente  D.Alberto  Lasky. 

A.  As  we  were  together  in  my  ftudy,  and  I  ftanding  at  my  Desk.  There  appeared  to 
E.  K.  a  round  Globe  of  white  fmoak  over  my  head.  Thereupon  /perceived  the  prefcnce  of 
fome  good  fpiritual  Creature,  and  ftraight  way  appeared  the  good  Angel.     /.  L. 

A.  /  laid,  Benedidm  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini,&  igitur  nobis  ejl  gratus  laudis  adventus. 

I.L.  Et  quid  tu  dicis?   [ad  E.  K.  LoquutuseiL] 

6.  K-  Si  boniii «,  iff  lucu  fpirkus,  bene  yenijliy  I.  L, 

I'L.  Et  bene  tibi  fiet.     E.  K.  He  hath  a  befome  in  his  hand. 

£.  K-    What  will  you  do  with  this  beromer 

A.  Quid  cum  tua  fcopa  decrevifti  facere? 
/.  L.  Seaindum  Dei  beneplacitum. 

E  EX,Here 


2  6        A  true  Kelation  of  D'.  Dee  his  Jciions  mth  fpirits^  &c. 


£•  K.  Here  comsth  a  bi^  tall  creature ,  formi  hutnana  qux  facile  non 
poflk  difccrni,  oculi  ejus  vidcantur  cfTc  duo  Carbunculi  Lucentcs  &  mirabi- 
litcr  micantes.  Capur  ejus  videcur  aureum  ,  os  vidctur  valde  largum  effc, 
&  Caput  videtur  mobile  &  quad  ab  humcris  feparabilc^  totum  rcliquum 
Corpus  vidcrareflfemarmor  quafi- 

Vox Tecifti  tu  ? 

[E.K.^  hefaidfotoZL. 

Sufplar  hue  IL. Feci.  Decedite  in  Oratoriunt,  nam  magna  hie  dicenia.  (u»t. 

faltii'neffeut        ^i  decedent  ?  I  L.  Trincepsy&  tu.  (Bow  down  thy  knees  brother)  and  here  what  I  do  fay. 

q^kmr  #t  r Jo  g.  j^,  he  fpake.] 

TT'dnll         Magnus  ille Filiolihominum  qvidvuhis  ? 

toi  (uht'ienio        A-  Cupinius  ninndari  apeccatis,  &  illuminari  fapiencia  divina,  ad  ems  honorem. 

inccghatmee-     g  j,^.  Eft  lumen  quoddasn  in  Acic  J    & ipfccfculatur lumen illud- 

"'  ^J  ""        ■        j^ DiCjPropititis  ejlo/fiihipeccatori. 

K  £•  Propitius  efto  mihi  peccatori,  O  Deus,  crefcit  jam  Corpus  iftius 
magniiii  immenfum  quantum,  qaod  nonpofCc  facile  difccrni' 

Mag Filii  hominum^  quid  vultis  ? 

A.  SapienXiamveram. 

Mag 0  vos  pueri  &  filii  hoi>tinu»t,quid  vultis  ? 

A,.   Sapientii.Ji  inDeojSi  propter  Deum,  verani. 

Mag Jsdite,  ci''.i  Jujiuf  &veriu  fum  (  inqi'it  Vomiiiuf  ;  )    Vos  nihil  impiunty    iniquim^ 

SwguUhm  iielinjujhimfufcipite:  N^m  qudiCunquefeceritiirniiU  ,  vel  negligentiay  vel  tnfcitiayvelcontemptuy 
pmfert  vsrbii,  -j^i  (titf-n  ttiniia  fuperjiit/one  futtt,  (  Sicut  Scriptunt  eft  )  poteiate  tradita  fpiritibus  mendacibufy 
flammmexore.  ^^  y^xarent  brnos,  dim  affligerentmalos.  Sed  dixit  Deuf  (  Deusfum  quidem  vefter  )  qui  Spiritum 
evmit,  Sanaum  iton  aufero  a  vobis  :  Nam  eftisfquos  per  potentiam  confirmabo  meam  :   Nolite  igitur  Cz' 

■^  com.i'^i  Cumperverlis  fieri,  ^//i  inaniter  rebus  &  Idolis  h'jjus  mundi  potentiam  afcribimt  meam, 

De Sullu'nn'i-  Sed  Crediteperfeveranter  &  ad  fineni  tifque  &  fidetn habete  :  quia,  (^per  me  )  omnia,  mundana 
bus:p:inbus  fupe.'.ii  pgilhwt.,  &fiihjiciet  D^mones  voluntative!h£.  Ddmones  fub  regienitus  permanentes,^ 
Argii:  b'niubi  ifi~i,jfi  Lmaribusy  An;^cli  mei  noii  funt  :  Sed  Caleftes,  San&i  &  veri  honi.  Nonne  vos  homines  &• 
fedisbabent.     ^jsyialcs  6'  non  fine peccato,  C«i  volimtateni  liheram  ,  fiinul &  percare  permijp :  vt  intelUgendo 

Pene  omnium    exinde  jnaluni,  &  me  Veuni  veflru>»  agnofcatis  vos.   Audite  igitur-,  Audite  filii  mei, Calami- 

pn.c:^>um'in'  tatem  totiui  terr£  omniumqueviventium pr£dico.  Bella  erunt  undiqtiehorrenda  &  triftiffima,  Et 
teriius.  peribit  ad  tertiamufque  partem  gladio  &  fame  Terra,    Erunt  cxdes  mv.ltoruw,  (^  penc  omnium  ) 

T.( -act  Imperii  tritrcipum  interitus  ,  Terra  motin,  quales  non  ab  initio  mwidi  i  Terreftrit  D^monis  QTurcg 
ruina.  y'u.')  Imperii  ruina.       Nam  fie  conftitui. 

[E,  K,']  Nunc refpcit vos- 

A.  y^.  L.  and  I  were  in  my  Oratory. 

Stephanus,  Folonienfis,  niiferrine  in  bello  jugulatus,  Cadet.  Iterutii  dico  ;  Stephaniu,  ?o- 
lonienfis  Rex,miferrime  in  bello  jifgulatuf,  cadet.  Vocabant  te  itenim  \^refpicit  Alb.  Lasky  ] 
ad  Regnum  Vrindpes  :  quern  etiam  ego  Polonia;,  Moldavice  &-  populi  mei  Ducem  &  regem  con~ 
iiiXucro.  Tunc  attinges  defideratam  met  am  &  nonerrabii  a  Scopo.  Bl^it  ego  [urn  Veus  tuns,  & 
•  doceho  te  iitilta  &  vera.  Et  dabo  tibi  Angelas  meo:  adjutores  &  comites  etiam  ad  fiecrctum  quod- 
libet  mundi.  Vigilato,  Orato.  Igitur  ,  Tim  efto  ,  donee  venerit  poteftas  mio.  &  in  te,  & 
fupra  vos.       Inter um  figillate  qu£  vidiftiiy&  me  in  publicum  producite. 

tse  inpubiicum    [i^-K."]  Now  He  (haketh:  he  feemcth  to  turn  his  head  about  his  (houlders. 
'"  """'  E,  K,  Nunc  accipit  en/em  <(s*  pcrcutit  nubss,  ^  crucem  format  antefe,  ah  utro- 

qu^  latere  i^  poji  fe.     Credemihi,  efl  finis  rerum -.  Dimitntntur  Peccata'Ve/ira. 
E.  K.  Cadic,    quafi   diftradus ,  (  vel  fc  feparans  )  in  4  partes,  &  a- 

volut- 

Vox Habetit  qu£adeo  Vecretafunt. 

A.  Mifericordia  Dei,  fie  fuper  nos  mmCj  &  femper.    Amen. 

Szturdzy  Junii  29  i  meridie  hora  4. 

A.  While]  was  about  to  write  the  Titlcofthefecond  fide  of  thefeventh  leaf :  zr\d(E.K. 
^''•'^"^S^y  '"^  ^  M<?(//«i  appeared  as  before  like  a  young  girle,  and  I  fainted  her  in  the  Naitie 

Hhcn*he'be-    °^^°'^' ^^  *'°™'"S  ^"^^"^  ^^"^ '^'^5°°*^' ^""^  ^'^''^  "-^  '^^'''  '■''^''  '  ^^^   wonderfully  opprelfed 

gJn4;ftX4f(iic  with  the  Work  prefcribed  tome  to  perform  before  ^.'i^«/r  next,  and  defired  hertohelpme 

"  'Pedigree,   toone  to  write  the  holy  Book  as  it  ought  to  be  written:    feeing  I  did  all  I  could,  audit  f- em- 

ed  almoft  inipoffible  for  me  to  finifli  it  as  it  is  requifite.        Madami  promifed  to  help  me  to 

one 


.ni< 


^true  Relation  ofiy.  Dee  his  JUuns  mth  [pints,  6cc-  -      ly 

one  to  write  the  Boo'rC ;    and  thereupon  appeared  to  her  (  but  uiifcen  of  E.  K.  )  her  Mother 

Madimi  faid  aU'Oj  that  (he  was  now  learning  of  Greek  and  Arabiek  ,  and   the  ^ylian 

Tongue. 

Mad Mother  fprayyou  let  him  have  nne  to  write  hit  Book,, 

A.  I  pray  thee  tell  me  Midi>»i,  what  was  his  name  which  yeftcrday  tempted  my  friend 
and  accufed  nic  moil  unduly  and  untruely  to  E,  if.  us  a  murderer ^  and  hypocrite,  and  one 
that  had  injured  a  thoufand. 

Mad Hif»ame  was  Panlacarp. 

A.  Can  the  wicked  Conjurers  have  their  Devils  to  write  Books  at  the'r  commandments, 
and  fhall  not  an  honelt  Ghriftian  Phiiofopher  hare  the  help  of  God  his  good  Angels  to  write 
his  holy  Myfteries  fo  greatly  redounding  to  his  Glory?  And  feeing  you  arc  the  Mjcher  of 
ftf'i^/wi  here,  I  befeech  you  tell  me  your  name  here  ;  as  the  order  of  all  our  domgsaredi- 
itinftly  and  orderly  noted. 

Mother 1  am  of  the  word,  and  by  the  word  :    I  fay,  Seal  up  thofe  things  thou  haft  :  ' 

And  I  myfelf  will  take  charge  of  G^z/i/^^  to  the  end.    Ad  evitand'm  fcand^i/um. 

A.  Truth  it  is,  it  niurt  grow  to  a  great  miflikeing  grudge,  that  God  (h  ould  fcem  to  have 
laid  burdens  on  our  fiiouldcrs,  greater  than  we  are  able  to  bear :  and  then  if  we  fall  and  faile 
under  them,  he  would  find  a  caufc  not  to  perform  his  promifes  made  for  carrying  of  thofe 
burdens. 

Mother Whatfoever  is  thy  part,   the  fame  will  I  perform.       I  wllfut  thy  yoke  (  in  this 

one  thing) iip'.n  my  (fioulders. 

A.  Will  you  then  write  it  as  I  (hould  have  written  it  ? 

.Mother ......  1  have  faid  I  will. 

A.  Where  (hall  1  leave  the  Book  > 

Mother Leave  it  where  y  uwill :  your  locks  are  no  hindrance  to  us.      Even  when    Our  locks. 

the  time  Cometh  believe  and  you  (hall  find  it  written. 

A.  You  have  eafed  njy  heart  of  a  thoufand  pound  weight. 

Mother Becaufeje  jhall  not  fall  into  error.         JJoji  thou  believe  ? 

A.   Yea  verily. 

Mother. "then  verily  will  I  do  it.       Fides  tua  erit  inftrumentum  operationis  mei  j 

Erit,  &  videbitis,  &;  nunquamperibit. 

Galvah One  thing  I  will  teach  thee.       The  End  is  greater  than  the  Beginning^  or  the 

Midii  ;     For  the  End  n  witneffe  of  them  both :     But  they  both  cannot  witneffe  of  the  End. 

Mother He  that  appeared  yejierday  is  faji  enough,  now  :    Maiden,  Say  your  leffon^  when 

1  am  gone. 

A.  I  pray  tell  me  your  name. 

Mad Mother  I  pr  ay  you  tell  your  name. 

Mother I  A  M  j  What  will  you  more? 

^'  K.  She  flicth  away  like  a  fire.  3iad'ml  falleth  down  proftrate  on  her 
face  a  while. 

A.  Now  I  fliall  have  Icifure  to  follow  my  fute,  and  to  do  all  Mr,  Gilberts  bufineffe. 

Mad My  Mother  will  fpeak,to  the  ^een  for  you  Jhortly.       Serve  you  Gjd   while  I  d» 

fray, 

E  K.  She  prayech  vehemently*      Nowihecometh  neartous* 

Madimi I  pray  you  teach  me  tofpell,  £  She  fpake  to  £.  K. 

w    f  -TL-    •     •  .      .         •  1  NificawMsifli^ 

Mad This  iS  e*^fiM<fi;MT7wf,  amic  .s  hac  ofut 

OUT®-  *  i-mifQ-  TOxa  etyoi'  *c<riiC*'-  ^'  »s  the  Syrian  Tongue  you  do  not  undcrftind  k.  •  -  ( to  A.)  fubvcrtety  «^f. 

forte  wiUftf/^tTn*  vel  ■icld(irM 
law' aura TOo-auTor  c^K4^»r« 

alicitU'-,vel  abdrahitur 
•re  Kana.  <ifiKKilno,fi\ia. 

ifogf,  (in  Ti»tt  tt'ura  a'fiffJju  ira.fHTeu  Th»r  was  with 

"    '  R    »  o_    .  his  oft  red 

<»*  <n  S'lcL   Tza>T^  a.7C0h.tTzet.  frienaflilpa* 

he  contelTed 

£•  ^-  UnlefTc  you  fpcak  fome  Language  which  I  undcrfland,  I  will  cx- 
prcffe  no  more  of  this  Ghybbnfli-  Now  (he  prayeth  again.  Now  flic 
ii  gone- 

E  2  A.  Bene- 


1 8       A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  jBions  mth [pints,  &c. 


t^.  Benediftus  fit  Deus,  Pater  Nofter,  Delis  totius  Confolationis,  qui  rcfpexit  affliftionefn 
fervuli  fui,&  in  ipfo  punfto  neceflltatis  nieae  praeftititniihi  aiixilium  ;  iple  Solus  Cordis  Scruta- 
tor eft  &  renuni,  Ip(e  eft  Lux  meajSc  Adjutor  meus,  &:  Sufeeptor  njeus  eft.  In  Domino  fpe- 
ravi  ,  &  liberavit  nie  ab  anguftia  maxima  propter  gloriam  Nominis  fui,  quod  lit  exaltatum 
tii  magniricatum  nimc,  &  in  fempitema  fecula.    Amen^  Aniens  Amen. 

b..  My  heart  did  throb  oftentimes  this  day,  and  thought  that  E»  K".  did  intend  to  abfent 

himfelf  from  me,  and  now  upon  this  warning  1   was  confirmed,  and  more  aflured  that  it  was 

fo  :  Whereupon  feeing  him  make  fuch  hafie  to  ride  to  Iflington  :  I  asked  him  why  he  fo   haftcd 

to  ride  thither:  And  f  faid,  if  it  were  to  ride  to  Mr.  Harry  Lee,  I  would  go  thither  alfo  to  be 

acquainted  with  him ;  feeing  now  I  had  fo  good   leafure  ,  being  eafed  of  the  book  writing: 

Fifty  pound     Then  he  faid,  that  one  told  him  the  other  day  that  the  Duke  did  but  flatter  him  ,  and  told 

y  ar'y  to  be     him  Other  things,  both  againft  the  Duke  (or  Palatine)  and  me,  e^c.  1  anfwered   for  the  Duke 

provided  for     gj^j  my  felf ;  andalfofaid,  thatif  thcfourty  pound  annuity  ^  which  Mr.  Lee  did  offer   him, 

E  K.  by  Juhn    ^^^  ^^^  ^j^j^p  ^^^^^^  ^f  j^j^  minde  fctling  that  way  (contrary  to  many  of  his  former  prontifes  to 

"'  me)  that  then  I  would  alfure  him  ©f  fifty  pound  yearly,and  would  do  my  bcft  by  following  of 

my  fute,to  bring  it  to  pafleas  foon  as(potlibly)  Icoald,and  thereupon  did  make  him  promife 

Upon  the  Bible.   Then  £,  K.  again  upon  the  fame  Bible  did  [wear  unto  me  conftant  friendjhip,  and. 

never  to  forfikj  me  :  And  moreover  faid,  that  unleflc  this  had  fo  fain  out,  he  would  have  gone 

beyond  the  Seas,  taking  fliip  at  New-Cajile  within  eight  dayes  next :  And  fo  we  plight  our 

faith  each  to  other,  taking  each  other  by  the  hands  upon  thefe  points  of  brotherly ,  and  friend- 

ly  fidelity  during  life  ,  which  Covenant  I  befeech  God  to  turn  to -his  honour,  glorie  ,  and 

fervicc,  and  the  (omfort  of  our  brethren  fhis  Children  J)  here  in  earth. 

Tuefday,ytt/ii  2.  a  meridie.  Circa  Horam.  2- 

A.  While  J  was  writing  of  Letters  to  Mr.  Adrian  Gilbert  ^  Into  Devonfliire  y  Madini  ap- 
peared by  me  in  the  ftiidy,  before  E.  if.  fitting  in  the  Chair, firft  on  the  ground,  then  up 
higher  in  tiic  aire  .;  and  I  faid.  How  is  the  minde  of  Mr.  Secretary  toward  me,  me  think eth  it 
is  alienated  marvelloully. 

The  lord  Mad Tbofe  that  love  the  world,  are  hated  of  God.     The  Lord  Treafurer  and  he  arc 

Treafurer.and  joyned  together,  and  they  hate  thee.    I  heard  them  when  they  both  faid,  th,u  wouldji  go  mad  port' 
Secretary  Wal-  /j  :  Wbatfoever  they  can  do  agaiuft  thee,  affure  thy  felf  of.  They  will  Jhortly  lay  a  bait  for  thee', 

A.  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me :  what  bait,  (Z  befeech  you)  and  by  whom? 

Mad They  have  determined  to  fearch  thy  houfe  :  But  they  flay  untill  the  Vuk^e  be  gone, 

A.  What  would  they  fearch  it  for? 

Mad They  hate  the  Vuk^e,  (both)  unto  the  death. 

A.  And  why? 

Mad Tak^e  heed  that  you  deal  uprightly.  .... .  {Shefpahs  to  E.  K.] 

E-  X.  God  the  Creator  be  my  witncfle  of  my  upright  dealing,  withj  and 
toward  him,  (meaning  A  •)  ever  lince  my  laft  coming  to  him. 

E  K  li'  r  ^^^ ^'^  "  ^""^  ^^  T^^""^"^  difeafes, 

condoath,        £.  jr   gy  this  boolc  (taking thcBiblc  in  his  hand)   I  fwear  that  I  60 
carry  as  faithfull  a  minde  to  him^as  any  man  can,  ever  fince  my  laft  co- 
ming- 
Mad.  '.,..  Loo\_  unto  the  k,inde  of  people  about  the  T>u\e  :  and  the  manner  of  their  diligence. 

A.  What  mean  you  by  that  ?  his  own  people  mean  you  ?  or  who  ? 

Mad. The  efpies. 

A.  Which  be  thofe  ? 

Mad All,  there  is  not  one  true. 

A.  You  mean  the  Englijh  men. 

Mad lou  are  very  grojfe,  if  you  underfiand  not  my  fayings. 

A.  Lord,  what  is  thy  counfel  to  prevent  all? 

Mad Ihefpeechif  general.  The  wicked  ftiall  not  prevail. 

A.  But  will  they  enter  to  fearch  my  houfe,  or  no? 

Mad Immediately  after  the  J)uks  hii  going  they  will. 

A.  To  what  intent?  what  do  they  hope  to  finde  ? 

Mad TheyfiifpeB  the  Dukf  is  inwardly  a  Tray  tor. 

A,  They  can  by  no  means  charge  me,  no  not  fo  much  as  of  a  Trayterous  thought. 

Mad Though  thy  thoughts  be  good  ,  they  cannot  comprehend  the  deings  of  the  wickjd.     In 

Truft  them    /"wwwf  ,  they  hate  thee.     Trufi  them  not ;  they  Jhall go  about  Jhortly  to  offer  thee  friendjhip :  But    be 
"Of*  thou  a  worm  in  a  heap  of  fir  aw. 

A.  I  pray  you  ^expoHnd  that  parable. 

Mad A 


<iJ  true  %elation  of  D^,  Dee  his  ABions  mthffirits,  (3cc,       t  p 

^ \ - ■■■- .,,  -■  — —    - 

Mad Aheapofjhaw  being  never  fo  great^itnowaight  upon  a  worm  ,  notwithfianding  eve- 
ry liraw  hindrttb  the  iforpts  paffages.   See  rhem^  and  he  not  feen  of  thtrttj  doji  thou  nnderjiand  it  .<■ 

A.    1  pray  you  make  more  plain  your  counfel. 

Mad. .  . . .  Mv  iowife/  it  plain  enough. 

A.   When,  1  pray  you,  is  the  Duke  likely  to  go  away  ? 

Mad. ...  .In  the  middle  0/  Auguft. 

A  If  in  the  midfl  of  Augvji  he  will  go,and  then  our  praftifes  be  yet  in  hand,  what  ftiall  be 
done  with  fuchour  furniture  is  prepared,  and  ftandingin  the  Chamber  of  praftife. 

Mud.,  ...  Jhou  had  no  faith. 

His  ''oing  ftandtth  upon  the  determinated  purpdfe  of  God.  He  ii  your  friend  greatly  ,  and  a.L. 
intendei  h  to  do  much  for  you.  He  it  prepared  to  do  thee  good,and  thou  art  prepared  to  do  him  -fer'  Sci  vice, 
vice.     Many  men  purpofc,  but  one  fettcth  in  order.  _    '  -  •'  ''  "'• 

a'.  As  concerning  Adrian  Gilbert^  what  pleafcth  you  to  fay  of  him ,  and  his  iritcnd-ed 
voyage. 

Mjd He  ii  not  in  the  true  faith.  . 

A.  How  hath  it  been  faid,  then.  That  he  lliould  be  the  fetter  forth  of  God,  his  faith  and  re- 
ligion among  the  infidels. 

Mad That  it  a  myliery,  r?j.     ,:s;,Vvi  i>R,> 

A.  Whether  fliall  it  be  good,  that  the  Duke  refdrt  hither  oft,  or  tarry  for  the  moft  part  at 
his  houfe  atL:'«^c«. 

Mad. ...  Hununepohcie  cannot  prevail.  As  many  as  are  not  faithfull  in  thefe  caufes^pall  die  a 
wo'i  nttferable  death  :  and  (hall  drink^  of  Jl.ep  everlajiing.  As  in  one  root  there  are  many  divifans^ 
Co  in  the  \iein  and  [ranches  are  many  fepa'rations, 

A.  Give  fome  more  light  (l  beleech  you)  to  the  particular  undci  (landing. 

Mad Jhe  fire  that  kjndleth  ailthefe^  and  wherein  thy  live  ii  One,  f  rming  them  accordingto 

(wbatfo  ver  )  the  fubftance  whereupon  they  are  grounded.    So  by  the  leffe  yon  may  prove  the  greater: 
7'hat  Oi  if  pdrttcular,fo  Hkjwife  generally^  All  emanations  are  from  one.     In  the  firit  workman- 
Jhip  lieih  fecret  in  one  unknown  :  And  is  fealed,  and  therefore  it  hath  an  end.     The  fon  through  the 
Circles  and  Majftf  body  ,    The  heart  in  the  body   ,  The  intelligence  in  the  inward  man  ,  Jhe  [on 
fromhis  iwntentte  fpreadethout  theleams  of  his   limited  virtue  ,  The  Hart  life  to  two  ;  and  yet  yj^^  Yitaxu 
the  Centre  of /ij."   to  the  whole /^ody^  underjianding  quickjieth  the  minder  that  minde  I  fpeak  oflhemndc 
pwrtft^oK  <i  fis'y  ftape.      It  followeth  therefore  3  that  every  thing  (what  fubliance  foever")  hach  <rputtcthona 
Centre :  From  the  which  the  Circumfluent  beams  of  his  proper  power  do  proceed,    ffhen  thefe  ^"1  '^*P^' 
dreperfeQly  known:  Then  are  things feen  in  their  true  kjnde.  I fpeak,this  to  prove,  that  the  good 
Angslot  man,  which  is  the  external  C  cntre  of  the  Soul,  doth  carry  with  him  the  internal  Cha- 
rafter  of  that  tning  wnereof  he  feeketh  to  be  a  Dignifier,  within  the  which  doth  lie  fecret ,   the 
Con]uni\\on  jnd^c\^zrztion  of  the  poportion  of  their  times,  betwixt  the  hul  and  body  of  man. 
0  happy  (therefore)  is  that  Soul,  which  beholdeth   the  glory  of  his  dignification,  and  is  partaker 
with  him  that  is  his  keeper.     This  k.nown  unto  men,  the  thickjteffe  of  the  earth  doth  not  hinder 
their  fpeeches ;  neither  can  the  darkjteffe  of  the  loweji  aire  obfcure,  or  make  dark,  ^he  (harpne^e  $f 
their  eyei.     This  Character,  (at  his  next  coming  h'ther)Jhall  be  made  manifeft  unto  him. 

E'  K.  He  flicwcih  a  bloudy  hand,  holding  a  hlondy  Cioi{c  with  kttgrs 
qYI  ir^ liks our  hoy  ktters^ 

A.  I  befeech  you,  how  fliall  his  provifion  of  money  from  home  ferve  his  torn,  or  how  flial! 
he    here  have  help  for  his  charges  bearing  ? 

Mad "iour  words  make  me  a  Childe.     Thofe  that  fi(h  for  Dolphins    do  not  fi and  upon  t^^  More  the  form 

ground,     Thofe  that  fit  in  Counfel  call  not  tn  the  harveft  people, nor  account  not  their  workj.     He  of  a  child. 
that  jiandeth  above  the  M'Jon,feetb greater   things  then  the  earth:  Is  it  not  faid.  The  Lord   will 
provide  ?     I  jhnd  abf.ve  the  Moon,  for  that  I  difpofe  his  life  from  above  the  difpoftionofthe  Mton. 
To  aik,what  ]dCoh  his  fervants  did, was  a  folly;  becaufe  their  majier  was  hleffed :  A  greater  queftion 
to  Jikhow  bleffed  he  w,ts,thento  ask  how  many  flieephehad, 

A.    I  am  defirous  to  know  what  you   meant  by  faying  ,  That  my  words  made  you  a 
Cf  ilde. 

Mad Becaufe yu  ask.  >"e  Child ijh  que(iions.    His  good  Angel Jhall  reveal  hk  CharaUer  unto  Reference  to' 

him,  and  thou  (halt  fee  it,  [^poitJting  to  E.  Kf]  But  take  heed  thou  fay  truely  ;  And  ufe  great  rr- good  Angeli. 
verence,  or  elfe  the  feet  that  love  thee  fliall  carry  thy  Carkas  out  of  the  doors.  If  he  carry  it  lailum  dim- 
vpon  him,  it  jhall  be  a  token  of  the  Covenant  between  hitn  and  G  d.  i"""- 

A.  The  image,  or  limilitude  thereof  (mean  you)  made  in  pure  Gold.  Perhap*  eta- 

Mad I.  ....  So  thofe  that  Jhall  fee  hit  Standards  with  that  figne  in  them  Jhall  perijh  *"'  '  ' 

Mtterly. 

A.    You  mean ,  if  the  fame  be  painted  ,   or  otherwife  Wrought  in  his  Banners  and  Pe» 
tions,  &c. 

Mad Let  him  ufe  it  as  a  Covenant,  between  God  and  him, 

A.  How  fhail  he  frame  it  in  Gold,  foiid-wife,  or  tamine-wife? 

Madd.  ....   Hk  own  Angel  Jhall  reveal  it,  ,      s 

E  3  ^'  Be- 


90     A  tme^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mthfpirits, (5c c, 

t..  Becaufeit  hath  been  faid,that  in  the  beginning  of  our  Country  troubles  wc  fhould  be 
packing  hence  into  his  Country ;  What  token  Ihall  we  have  of  that  time  approaching,or  at 
hand  ? 

Mad Tour  watthwerd  is  told  you  before  :    When  it  it  [aid  unto  youy     Venite,  &c. 

b..  But  ( I  befeech  you  )  to  be  ready  againft  that  watchword,  hearing  what  is  to  be  done, 
as  concerning  our  wives  and  children  into  his  Country. 

Mad.  ......  (Ji^iraculouf  ii  thy  care  (  0  God  )  upon  thofe  that  are  thy  chofeny  and  wonderful 

are  the  wajes  that  thou  hajt  prepared  for  them.  Thou  (halt  takf  them  from  the  fields^  and  harbour 
tkemat  horne.  Thou  art  merciful  unto  thy  faithful  and  hard  to  the  heavy-hearted.  Thou  fh  alt 
cover  their  legs  with  Bootes^  and  brambles  Jhall  not  prick^  them :  Their  hands  Jhall  be  covered  with 
theskjnsofBeaJis  that  they  may  breaks  their  way  through  the  hedges.  Thy  Bell  (hall  go  before  them 
as  a  watch  and  fur e  T>ire£iion  :  The  Moon  Jhall  be  clear  that  they  may  go  on  boldly.  Peace  be 
avwngji  you. 

B-  K-  He  is  now  gone  away  in  a  fire,  JEterno  T>eo  nofiro,^  Laus 
Honor f  <sr  Gloria  in  feculorumfaimla.    Amen. 

Thurfday  j^z/Ai  4.  hora  11.  ante  ^Meridiem.   1583. 

Note.  A.  When  I  came  home  yefterday  from  the  Court ,  and  from  London,  and  from  the 
Lord  Laskje,  I  found  that  E.  K.  was  purpofed  to  ride  forth  of  Town,  and  intended  to  be  a- 
way  (as  he  exprefly  told  me)  five  dayes  :  Certain  Companions  and  his  acquaintance  having 
fo  appointed  with  him,rome  tarrying  for  him  in  Mortluck^e^  and  feme  at  Brainford  (  as  was 
perceived  this  day  afterward,  and  as  he  confeflxd  unto  me.  )  Whereupon  I  thought  good  to 
fignifie  fomuch  unto  the  Lord  Laskje  who  meant  to  come  and  refrefh  himfelf  at  my  houfe, 
as  he  was  wont  before  ;  either  this  day,  or  within  two  or  three  dayes  after  ;  Who  alfo  de- 
lighted in  E.  K.  his  company,  6'^c.  Hereupon  about  the  time  of  E.K.  his  rifing  I  wrote  thefe 
lines,  intending  to  fend  them  prefently  to  the  Lord  Laskje^  that  word  might  be  returned  of 
his  intent  before  £.  K.  ihould  ride,  I  meaning  and  hoping  to  perfwade  £.  K.  to  tarry  fo  long, 
and  upon  fuch  refpeft. 

^'10biliff^me  Princeps,  in  reditUy  noflrum  Edwardum  inveni^  facie  quidem  Uta  :  fed  itineri  ta- 
^'  men^ut  dicity  quihque  dierum^  fe  accingentem  :     Hocque  matutino  tempore   abitum  vel  iter 
ijhid  ingredi  mAitur  j  Reverfurus  (^ut  affirmat  ')pofi  quinque  dies,     ^id  fit    ipfa   veritaSy 
novit  illequi  verus  &  Omnipotens  Deus  eji  nolh\     Hoc  voluiy  ifto  manefummoy  vobis  fignificarey  ut, 
quid  fadu  optimum  fity  Cogitetis  :  De  aliisyfuo  tempore, 

Vaeftrae  Celfitudinis  fidelifllmus  Clientulus 
y«/«4.  1563.  Joannes  Dee. 

This  Letter  being  now  written,  and  not  yet  folded  up,  my  friend  E.  K.  was  ready  and 
came  out  of  his  Chamber  into  my  Study  ;  and  I  told  him,that  I  was  even  now  fending  word 
to  the  Prince  L/Zi/;,/?  of  his  rideing- out,  and  return  after  five  dayes  5  and  fofliewed  him  the 
Letter:  who  when  hecametothe  phrafe,  ^//</ y/t  ipfa  Veritas  ,  he  was  famewhat  offended, 
faying.  What  fecret  meaning  hath  this,  uponfome  of  your  two  former  conference  ?  Truly  (faid 
I  )  even  fuch  as  thecircumftance  of  the  Letter  doth  import,  that  is ;  Whereas  you  faid  that 
you  intended  to  return  within  five  dayes,  or  at  the  fame  dayes  end,  it  is  uncertain  whether 
you  will,  or  (hall,  return  later  or  fooner  :  and  therefore  ^idfit  ipfa  Veritas  of  your  return, 
or  intent  to  return,  onely  God  doth  know.  He  would  by  no  meanes  admit  that  my  iincere 
expofition,  but  feemed  fufpitious  of  fome  other  undue  conftruftions  of  thofe  former  words  ; 
thereupon  I  took  the  Letter  and  tore  it  in  three  pieces,  and  fent  none  :  But  in  my  mind  re- 
ferred all  to  God  his  difpofition,  affuring  my  felf  of  God  his  moji  conftant  proceeding  in  his  own 
affairs.  Shortly  after  faid  £.  K.  to  me.  Certainly  here  is  a  fpiritual  Creature  in  my  right 
Sowle.  (houlder,  who  fsnfibly  faith  to  me,  Come  away  :    So  (  faid  I  )  did  one  fay  to  Sowle^  when 

Evil  fpirits.      they  would  have  had  him  away  to  have  drowned  him,  whom  I  flayed  in  this  Study  by  force, 
and  fo  hindered  the  Devil  of  his  purpofe  then  ;     as  appeareth  by  that  unhappy  man  yet  alive. 
Nay  faid  E.  K.  they  have  told  me  that  if  I  tarry  here,I  (hall  be  hanged  ;  and  if  I  go  with  this 
Prince  he  will  cut  off  my  hcad,and  that  you  mean  not  to  keep  promife  with  me  ;    And  therefore 
if  1  might  have  a  thoufand  pound  to  tarry,    yea  a  Kingdom,  I  cannot :  Therefore   I  releafe 
Fifty  pnind     you  of  your  promife  of  50  pounds  yearly  Stipend  to  me,and  you  need  not  doubt  but  God  will  de- 
ycarly  ftlpend.  fend  you  and  profper  you,  and  can  of  the  very  ftones  raife  up  children  to  Abraham  :    And  a- 
£.  K.  his  wife.  S^'"  ^  i-'^^MOt  abide  my  wife,  I  love  her  not,  nay  I  abhor  her  ;    and  there  in  the  houfe  I  am  mifli- 
ked,becaufe  I  favour  her  no  better.     To  thefe,  fuch    his  words  fpoken  in  great  pangs  and 
difquietiieffe  of  mind,  I  rcpofed  and  faid,  That  thtfe  his  doings  and  fayings  were  not  of  God, 
and  that  by  my  wliole  proceeding  he  might  perceive  what  confidence  1  repofed  in  his  dealing 
with  the  fpiritual,  our  friends,  feeing  even  to  the  uttermoft  penny  (and  more  than  my  abiUty 
ferved  unto  convenienily  )  I  laid  out  ftill  about  the  .. ..  ming  of  fuch  things,  as  were  by  me  to 
bedonc,  e&"c.       Well,  on  the  fudden,  down  he  went ;     upon  his  Mare,  and  away  toward 

Brainford. 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBuns  mth  fpirits,  dec,        3 1 

Brainford.     After  vvhofe  going,  my  Wife  eamc  up  into  my  Study,  and  1  faid,  Jank,  this  man 

is  mcrvalloiifly  out  of  quiet  againftliis  Wife,  for  her  friends  their  bitter  reports  againfthim  E.rc.hiswiTcs 

behind  his  back,  and  her  lilence  thereat,  &c.     He  is  gone  ,   faid  I,    but  I  befeech  the  Al- fticnds. 

mighty  God  to  guide  him  and  to  defend  him  from  danger  an^l^fhame ;    1  doubt  not  but  God 

will  be  merciful  to  him,  and  bring  him  at  length  to  fuch  order  j    as  he  fliall  b-  a  faithful  fcr- 

vanc  unto  God,  &c. 

Note  within  tliree  hours  after,  came  E.  K.  up  my  Study  ftairesunbooted,  for  he  was  come 
in  aboat  from  Zminfori,  When  I  faw  him  I  was  very  glad  inwardly  :  But  I  remained  writ- 
ing of  thofe  Records  as  I  had  yet  to  write  of  Tuefdayes  laft  aftions.  I  have  lent  my  Mare 
out(  faid  he  )  and  fo  am  returned.  It  is  well  done  faid  I,  and  thereupon  he  fate  down  in  ' 
the  chair  by  my  Table  where  he  was  wont  to  lit:  And  it  was  ten  of  the  clock  then.  He 
took  up  in  his  hand  the  Books  which  I  had  brought  from  London  of  the  L.  Lashje^  written 
to  him  ill  his  commendations,  d^'.-.  And  as  he  was  looking  earneftly  on  thetn,  a  Spiritual 
Creature  did  put  the  Book  on  the  outfide  of  the  parchment  cover,  divers  times  ;  and  once 
would  have  taken  it  cut  of  his  hands  :  Divers  times  I  heard  the  ftrokes  my  felf ;  At  length 
he  faid,  I  fee  here  the  handfome  Maiden  M^'Aw',  and  have  done  a  pretty  while.  Then  faid 
I  to  him,  Why  told  you  mc  no  fooiier  ?  Whereupon  I  took  paper  purpofely  to  Note  what 
fliould  fe<:tn  Note-worthy  asfollovvetli. 

A.  Miftrefre  Madimi,  you  are  welcome  in  God,  for  good,  as  I  hope  ;  What  is  the  caufd 
of  your  coming  now  ? 

Mad To  fee  how  jou  do. 

/\.  I  know  you  fee  me  often,  and  I  fee  you  onely  by  faith  and  imagination. 

Mad [  Pointing  to  £.  K.  ]  Tbatjiefit  is  perfecier  than  his. 

A.  O  Midi»ii,  Shall  I  have  any  more  of  thefe  grievous  pangs  ? 

Mad.  ......  C"r\i  JFives,  and  great  Devils  are  fore  [^ompanions. 

L.  Inrefpiftof  theLord  Treafurer,  Mr.  Secretary,  and  Mr.  Rawlj,  Iprayyou,  What 
worldly  comfort  is  there  to  be  looked  for?  Belides  that  I  do  principally  put  my  truft  in 
God. 

Mad (JMadder  willjhi>ie,  wicked  men  will  offend,  an  d  are  eafie  to  be  offended. 

A.  And  being  offended  will  do  wickedly,  to  the  perfecution  of  them  that  raeane 
fimply. 

Mad.  ......  Or  e/fe  theyvcere  nit  to  be  called  ■X'ickfd. 

A.  As  concerning  A'b^  Laskje  his  Pedigree,  you  faidyour  Sifter  would  tell  all. 
Mad.  » I  told  you  wore  then  alljrir  Doit  paimers  and  Cat  painters  can  do, 

A.  You  fpoke  of  Ji'illi:tni  Laskje  and  Sir  Richard  Laskje  his  br other ,of  which  fViUiam  go- 
ing into  France,  and  then  into  Denmarkf  '•  and  his  marriage  into  Poland^  came  this  Albert 
Laskje,  now  Paladine  o(  Soradia,  Sec, 

Mad Thofewere  two  pretty  men  for  me  to  meddle  withal.  fVbenyou  fet  yonr  felves  to- 
gether, and  agree  together,  I  will  make  all  agree  together. 

E.  K.  Will  you  Madimi\md  me  a  hundred  pound  for  a  forcnight  ? 

Mad I  have  fwcpt  all  my  money  out  of  doors. 

A.  As  for  money  we  fhall  have  that  which  is  necefTary  when  God  feeth  time. 

Mad Hear  me  what  I  fay.  God  is  the  unity   of  all  things.  Love  it  the  unity  of  every 

Congregation  (  I  mean  true  andperfc&  love,  )       The  fForld  was  made  in  the  love  of  the  father. 
Jon  ft'ere  redeemed  in  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.        The   Spirit  of  God  it  (yet  )  the  love 
of  his  Church.        let  (^1  fay  )  :    For  after  it  doth  Triumph^  it  is  not  called  a  Church  nor  a  Con-  ^'  ^^  "'* '" 
gregation  :  But  a  Fruitful  Inheritance  and  a  Perfeft  Bjdy  inChriji.       Take  the  love  of  the  Fa-  r  *' m^"''^"'''* 
ther  from  the  World,  and  it  perifijeth.    Take  the  love  of  our  Redemption  away,  and  we  are  dead.        ^^^^^^ 
(  i  will  not  offend  )  put  your  injiead  of  our,        Take  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghojl,  which  is  the  love  The  '^ngels 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son  fr^m  the  Church,  and  it  withereth.      Even  fo  take  love  from  amoHgHyou,  were  not  rs- 
andyou  are  members  of  the  Devil  ;  Therefore  it  is  faid  unto  you  Diligite  ad  invicem.         For  love  "deemed. 
is  the  Spirit  of  God  uniting  and  k>'itting  things  together  in  a  laudable  proprtion.      fVhat  doji  thou 
bunt  after  ?  fpeak^manJVhat  doji  thou  hunt  after  ? 

\_  This  was  faid  to  £.  K.  upon  fome  fecret  judgement  of  Madimi  in  him. 

E.  K.  Ihunc  after  nothing- 

Tlje  love  of  God  hreedeth  faith;  Faith  bringeth  forth  (  on  the  one  fide^  Hope  ;    and  {on  the  i.  Faith. 

other  fide  )  the  workjs  ef  Ch.irity.  to;}  tbm  love  God  ?  Seekefl  thou  to  be  among  his  EleS  ?  Why  ^-  Hope- 
d(.jl  thou  not  (  therefore  )  love  th'fe  things  that  are  of  God  ?  Herein  thoujhewejl  the  want  of  faith;  J«C"*r'ty. 
Herein  are  thy  bragging  words  confounded  ;  for  thou  fay eji.  No  man  can  accufe  thee  of  evil.  But 
»tfl«  haft  no  faith  becaufe  thou  haft  no  hope.  -  Wilt  thou  fay,  that  thou  hafi faith  ?  Shew  it  me 
hy  thy  kve  :  Whofcever  (  therefore  )  loveth  not  God,  if  accurfed.  Thou  loveli  not  Cod,  Lb,  be- 
hold,thou  breakjli  his  Cmmrindments.  Ougkteji  thou  not  to  love  him?  And  h.i  ft  thou  not  faith 
through  the  kve  in  God  ?  Truely  thm  cughteffo  to  do.  Wilt  thou  let  me  fee  thy  hope  on  this  fide  ; 
Let  thy  yforkesftandon  the  other  fide.  And  (hew  thy  felf  to  have  faith  thap  therein  thou  mayeji  love 
Godf  and  be  beloved  of  h:)n :    But  if  thou  haji  none  of  thefe^  thou  haji  hate.       If  thou  hate  G:>d,the 

reward 


3L        A  truel^elationofD',  Dc&his  JBions  mthfp'mts,  (3cc, 


reward  thereof  if  great  ;   hut  the  greatnefe  is  vnqiKnchable  fire.        Whofoever  foUovreth  mt  the 
Conma»d»ients,hatethGod  ;  '  If  fin  be  the  breach  of  the  Cotntnandments^Scc.       Voji  thou  love 
Silver  and  Gold  ?     The  one  ii  a.  Thief,  the  other  is  a  Murderer.       JFilt  thoufeek^honour  ? 
E.  K.  No- 
So  did  Cain.       But  thou  h^fl  a  Jufi  God  that  loveth  thee  ■■,     Juft  and  verttious  men  that  de- 

^^Zil^^Jightinthee-.,  Jherefore  be  thouvertuom  :   For  tho.i   fhalc  tread   the   World   under  thy  feet  : 

'^Anno  1589.      I  pro7mfe  thee,  I  have  driven  the  Skjtllen-drab  out  of  our  Kitchen  long  ago. 

w.  en  he  was         a.    Do  yoii  mean  worldly  covetoufnefTe  ? 

niadeBaionof       jy^^jj Tea,  and  the  firji  heavenly  covetoufneffe. 

hohemia  4nna  Carina  geta  Barman. 

ijjo.  ° 

A.   I  befeech  you,  what  is  that  to  fay  ? 
Mad Veni  ex  illo  Barma. 

E.  K.  Fe!c  and  law  a  fpirituil  Creature  go  out  of  his  right  thigh. 

Mad,  ......  ff-here  are  thy  i:\. Companions  ? 

Bar They  dwell  here. 

A.  [  He  that  was  come  out,  feemed  a  great  handfome  man  with  a  Sachelof  a  Dogs  skin 
by  his  lide,  and  a  Cap  on  his  head,  &c.  '] 

A.  O  the  hand  of  the  Higheft  hath  wrought  this. 
Mad Venite  TenebraJtigiteSpiritu  weo. 

E.  K.  Here  appear  14  ot  divers  evil  favoured  fhapes :  feme  likeMona 
kies,  feme  hke  Dogs,  fome  very  hairy  monftruous  Men,  &c-  They  feemed 
to  [cratch  each  other  by  the  face-  Thefe  feem  to  go  about  JMadimi  and  fay, 
^il  de  praoina  kures  helech, 

Ci-  what  is  that  to  fay  ? 

Mad Volnmvs  hie  in  Nojiris  habit  are. 

A.   QUcE  funt  ilia  veftra  ? 

E-  K.-  One  of  them  laid  -•  Hahsmin  hominem  iftum  Dcmiciliutn noflrum. 

Mad The  vengeance  of  God  is  a  two-edged  Sword,  and  ciitteth  the  rebellious  wicked  ones' 

Thecafting      in  pieces.    The  hand  of  the  Lord  is  likf  a  jirong  oak^,  when  it  falleth  it   ciitteth  in  [under  many 

out,  and  utter  hujhes.  The  light  of  his  eyes  expell  darkjtejfcyand  the  fweetneffe  ofh^  mouth  h^epeth  from  corruption, 

difpLicingot    p^leffgd  are  thofewhom  he  favour  eth,  and  great  i^  their  reward;  Becaufe.you  came  hither  with- 

Wrhs  J-Tf       out  licence  and  feek  to  overthrow  the  liberty  of  God    his  Teftament,  and  the  light  where- 

'      ■      withal  he  ftretcheth  unto  the  end,  and  for  becaufe  you  are  accurfed  it  is  faid,  I  will  not  fuffer 

mine  to  be  overthrown  with  tcmptation,though  he  were  led  away,   Bihold  Ihringback^  again. 

Depart  unto  the  lali  Cry  :     Reji  with  the  Frince  of  Varkjteffe  there  is  none.     Amen,  go  you 

thither.        Et  fignabo  vos  ad  fineni. 

E.K.  He  fealed  them  all  in  the  forehead  :  the  14  and  their  principal, 
their  fealing  was  as  if  they  had  been  branded-  They  funk  all  1 5  downward  | 
through  the  floore  of  the  Chamberjand  there  came  a  thing  like  a  wind  &  ' 
pluckt  them  by  the  feet  away. 

E.  K.  Methinketh/amlighterthan  7  waSi  andIfcemtobeempty,and  [ 
to  be  returned  from  a  great  amafing  ^  for  this  fortnight  I  do  not  well  re;:  \ 
member  what  I  have  done  or  laid^ 

Mad Thouart  eafed  of  a  great  burden Love  God,  Lovethy  Friends, Love  thy  Wife, 

E.  K.  Now  comethonc  with  a  red  Crolle  in  his  hand  and  Icadcth  her 
away,ar!dfo  they  vanifhed-  We  prayed  the  Pfalm  of  thankfgiving  14  of 
Roffenfis  for  E-K-  his  deliverance  from  Barma  and  his  14  Companions-  /fw«tf»i ' 

A.  firft  papers,  E.  K.  Sal. 

by  appeard  often  to  him,whipping 

before  as    6.  or  7.  miles  diftant     from 

him  think   that   the   blefled    Jubanladace 

had  been  fent  to    have  faid    fomewhat  unto  us    of  his 

Charge   (  the  Prince  Laskje  )   But  I  found  in  the  end  that  it  was  a  token  that  the 
^                  Princce  L<riii;,7>  was  penlively  careful   of  us,    and  that  his  good   Angel  was  his  wit- 

nefle  and  mefllige,  by  that  token  his  peculiar  Carafter  as  is  before  taught. 

0)7mif  Spiritns  Laudet  TeumMojlrum  Vnum  &  Trinum.    Amen. 
Sequitur  liber  Tertiarius  Sexti. 

L  IBER, 


(^  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mth  fplrits^  6cCs       J  J 


LIBER     PEREGRINATIONIS     PRIMiEi 

Videlicet 


^  Morthco  tAngltiS  J 
lAd  Qraconiam  Tohmu- 


Saturday,  i'e^^f/y^.  21.  1583.     DieSani^iMatth<ei. 

lE  departed  from  Mortlack^,  about  three  of  the  Clock  after  noon :  The  Lord 
■  Albert  Lask^y  ,  (Vajwode  o(  Siradia  ,in  tolonia)  meeting  me  on  the  water  ,  as 
we  had  appointed:  And  fo  brought  night  to  London  j  and  in  the  dead  of  the 
night,  by  Wherries,  we  went  to  Greenwich  to  my  friend  Goodman  Fern  the  Pot- 
ter his  houfe  :  Where  we  refrefhed  our  felves,  and  thither  came  a  great  Tylt- 
boat  from  Graves  end  to  take  us  in,  (by  appointment  of  me  and  Mr.  Stanley)  to 
go  to  our  fliips  ,  which  we  had  caufcd  to  ly  fcven  ,  or  eight  mile  beyoud  Gr.-.ves 
end.  To  which  fliips  we  came  on  Sunday  morning  by  Sun  rife  :  In  the  greater  of  them  (being 
a  dubble  Fly-boat  of  DfHWar^)  my  Lord  Laskjey  I,  and  £.  K.  with  my  Wife  and  Children,&c, 
'  went :  And  in  another  fhip  (by  me  alfo  hired  for  this  palFage)  went  fome  of  my  Lord  his  men, 
two  horfe,&:c,  that  Ihip  was  a  Beyer,  a  pretty  Ihip.  With  little  windc  we  ftraight- way  hoyfed 
fayl,  and  began  our  voyage  in  the  (hip. 

This  22.  day  we  were  in  great  danger  of  perifhing  (on  the  fands  ,  called  the  5pits)  about  "^here  aiofe 
midnight.-  We  had  (by  force  of  wmde  contrary)  anchored  by  them,  and  the  Anchor  came  ^.*"'J,'',^"f 
home,  no  man  perceiving  it,  till  the  fhip  was  ready  to  ftrike  on  the  fands.  Then,  upon  great  ^'^^j^     "  ' 
diligence  and  poliicy  ufcd  by  our  Marrineri  in  hoyfing  fay!,  and  cutting  our  Cable,  (to  leave 
our  fliote  anker)  and  committing  our  felves  to  the  hands  of  Cod,  and  moji  eurnejily  prajing  for 
a  profperouf  vinde :  It  pleafed  the  Almighty  ,  and  moft  merciflill  God  ,  Suddenly  to  change  the 
winds,  which  fervcd  us  to  bear  from  the  fands,  and  to  recover  ^inborrough,  ba(  k  again. 

The  23.  day  (being  Munday)  we  came  to  the  mouth  and  entrance  of  ^?KWro»gi&  Creifi^,  or  rj,^  fV'J'-iic 
Haven.    And  as  we  made  to  land  in  fmall  Fiftier-boats,  the  Lord  Ltfkje.y  my  Wife  and  Chil-  help  oi  God  at 
dren  in  one  boat,  and  7,  with  E.  K.  Marie  ,  Elizabeth^  and  John  Crokjzr ,  in  another,  it  fell  fo  '^^  very  m.- 
out,  that  at  the  fliips  fide,  our  Fiiher-boat  his  fayl-yard  and  fayl    was  entangled  on  the  Mayn-  ')'"  j,°^  danger 
yard  of  the  Fly-boat  (being  ftroke  down)  fo  that,  in  our  fettmg  from  the  fhips  fide ,  the  top  "   ^' 
of  our  Boat  being  faft  above,  and  the  windes  and  ftrcam  carrying  the  Boat  off  below  ,  it  in- 
clined fo  much  on  the  one  fide,  that  the  one  half  of  the  Fifher  boat  (well  near)  was  m  the  wa- 
ter, and  the  water  came  foin  (by  theintangling  before  fpecitied  ,  notearily  to  be  undone,  or 
loofed)  that  my  Lord,  my  Wife,  and  all  thatfaw  us  thought  that  of  necerticy  our  Boat  muft 

fink,  and  fo,  we  to  have  perifht.  But  God  in  his  providence  and  mercy  had  greater of 

us,  fo  that  we  becanie  clear;  the  Boat  half  full  of  water,  fo  that  we  fat  wet  to  the  knees  ,  and 
the  water  with  the  billow  of  the  Sea  came  flill  beating  in  more  and  more  :  And  in  this  mean 
trouble ;  one  of  our  two  Boat-men,  had  loft  his  long  Oarc  out  of  the  Boat  into  the  water  ;  and 
fo  not  onely  we  lacked  the  help  of  thatOare  ,  but  alfo  by  reafon  they  would  have  followed 
the  winde  and  ebb,  for  that  Oar,  (contrary  to  our  courfe  in  handjand  not  able  to  become  by) 
with  much  adoe  we  conftrained  them  with  the  fayl,  our  one  Oare,and  the  Rudder  to  make 
fuch  Oiifc  as  they  could  to  get  to  §^inborrougb  Town  :  And  in  the  mean  fpace  £.  K.  with  a 
great  Gantlet  did  empty  moll  part  ot  the  water  out  of  the  Boat,elfe  it  mull  needs  have  funk  by 
all  mans  reafon.  At  length(to  be  brief)we  came  to  the  Town  fide,up  the  crooked  Creekjwherey 
when  as  the  Mafter  of  our  fhip  would  have  taken  me  out  in  his  arms  f  Handing  in  the  water 
with  his  Boots)  he  fell  with  me  in  the  water,where  I  was  foul  arrayed  in  the  water  and  Oafc. 
jGod  be  praifed  for  ever,  that  all  that  great  danger  was  ended  with  fo  fmall  grief ,  or  hurt. 

At  ^inborrough. 

Wednefday,  5'fptf wi.  2$.  Circa  ^.  a  Meridie,iamfleno  mart. 

A.  Oravimusad  Deum3ejusimplorabamusauxilum,Cortina  flatimapparuit.  Oravi  denuo 
folus,  pro  auxilio,  tempore  necelTitatis  :  Sex  pedum  altitudineapparebatunus,  in  acre,  quafi 
altera  ex  parte  nubis,inter  £.  if.  Et  ilium  intcrpofitae. 

E-  K'  Ego  ilium  cognofco- 

.....  Tu  habes  capfant  me  ccgnofcendi)&  ilium  qui  vie  mifity  vel  jam  nm  vixijfes. 

R.K.  Vidcturcfle Michael. 

F  A.  Gratiai 


34       ^  ^^^^  l^elatioa  ofD\  Dee  his  Anions  mihfp'mts,  6c c. 


A.  Gracias  agimusCreatorl  noiho,  qui  bonum,pocentem&  fideleni  miiiiftium  fimm  miferic 
ad  noftrani  proceftigncni  tempore  iieccincatis  noftr.e. 

Mich, .....  Loquor  de  trihiis  rebus^  de-vieiffo  &  ilto  qui  me  mifit  :  De  z'sbisyrefpeifii  illips  quod ejiify 

&  defervit/o  Dei  quod  futurum  eji-0  vos  potejiates  Cxli  &  terr£yCol[i^ite  vos.  in  fimul^refpicite  Beum 

vejirum  :  Coafideraie  hencficij  ejiir,  an  non  vos  colUgiivit  ^i:n\d  ^  Et  concatenavit  vos  in  feipfof-  An 

mn  ejtif  glorificati  refpeclii  officii  ve^iri^ad  quod  pr£.iaiidum  fotentcr  affignati  ejiitj  in  voluntate  ejiu, 

qui  glorificat  [eiffum.    Ecce  qmniodo  vofmet  dedidijii^  pri'icipi  tenehr.rrum :  vel  quare  ve'iri  princi- 

pes  contendnnt  contra  aliifftmnm  :  &  colligiti^  vofmet  in  fimul  ad  contendendmn  contra  ipfuni  qui  eji 

potent ilfjtniu,v el  tllum  velletk  fubptg-ire^  ctijiu  arvia  firnt  fuper  o-.wiem  fortittidimm  :  ^o  modo  au- 

detit  contendere  cum  ejus  fortitudtne  ?  Vel  qu£  eft  ciiufi  quod  tam  inipii  fjp  velitis  ?  Sed  ita  opor- 

tet  efTc  :  quia,  vobis  fiigilavit  gubernatioHerfi,8c  \n  veftrasmaniis  dcdit  violamdcftructionis,  Sed 

date  locum  jim  vojiro  :  ^la  in  ejus  fortitudine  difperfi  eritis  :  Et  omnium  rerum  conctufiom  oliia 

vejira  detent  (ffe  aperta.         Ne  mirentur  fervi  Dei,  de  fortitudin-  teniptationit  :  §yja  magna  ejl 

j/oteji-as  intpii  &  hia7itit  Leonit,  quando  i'li  eji  cum  figillo  trudita.   Ne  dedtgnemini ,    hac  bora^  fcio 

Government,   ^/ejir am  gnherndtiontm  per  i/lum.  Ecce  clavit  p'fiitix  aperta  mibi  ejl.   Nthilominus  vejhrx    adhuc 

ertt  major  iniquity,  &  vejirum  regnum  erit  difperfum  in  ejus  potenti  fuperbia.        ^am  ivaguus  eli 

Sathan  qui  reii^it  (omkndim  Dei  t         ^am  magna  ^  igitiir  ,  debet   effe  vejira.  humHit.ts ,  qu^- 

debet  vel  fuperare  vel  mori.    Sed  vobis  fie  di:it  Dominus.     Aperiant  venti  ora  fna  y&  rabientes 

Let  the' Far-     aqu£  profunda   &   potentia   guttiira.    In   omnes  partes  Miiviuni  vejlrarum.      Aperiat  terra  os 

kpts  light.       /■««»;,  &  die  at,  quod  devorare  vellet.    lamen  nan  prevttlehmt  ^ia  ti'i  add  am  ( inquit  Dominus) 

Michael.         qui  esforcitudo  meajPocentiam  meam  pr^valefcencem  :  Et  vos  eritis  du<e  liammas  ignis  ,  iwo 

Gabriel.  ^-^^^^  potent  is  firffocantis  os  totius  Malitia .  Idcirco^  vobis  bene  fit.:  ^ia  inimicus  efifortifjinius^ 

vbiprdda  eli  maxima.       Mementote,  quod  Homines  fttis.       Mementote ,  q'.iod  terra  fnif.        i^e- 

mentote^quodPeccatores,        Mementote  ^quid  tratis  ,&  ne  tradatis  obl/vioni  cuid  ejiys.     hi  HIq 

enim  vivitis  qui  omnia  infua  habet  fuhje&ione.     Sed  ille  ,   qui  cum  illo  eji yCrucifixi'.s   ad  glorianty 

Hichrrovi-      ^f^ff  ^,,  medio  mortalitatis  comfonere  fe  ipfuvt  ad  Immorta/em  Totintiam.         Servi  Dei  ,  fcmper 

dedyou.         prxvaluerunt :   Sed  femper  per  Adverfitates.         ^i   tmi  eji  de  hx  mundo  ,    vos    prjeparavic. 

Finis nSri       Kihilo  minus  debetis  ea  implere  ,  qiu  ipfe  providit.     Qiiod  imindus  polUt    fieri  novus,  8c 

jeivitii.  j^^j-^   agnofci.         Fotens  ipfe  eji,  Potens  eji  il'e  y  Aquila  ilia  ^«*  coopent  magnum  montemalit 

fais^  Sedpotentior  eji  ejus  fortitudo  qui  mmerat  jlelLa ,   &  montes  colltgit :    ISl.im  quicqrjd  ipfe 

Lapped  up.      /oq!iitur,eli  veritatis  ignis  :  Et  eji  fimul Potentia  &  Acius,  in  immediata  proportione.        Etiam  ipfe 

^ui' fecit  Orbem,hominem  inftmulcom\iegic,&-  omnia  operatus  eji  ,  Omnia,  ipfe  extjiens.   Ipfeejiqui 

vobis  pmceptum  dedit  :  Et  ego  vobis  dicoj  Kefpicite  de  pun6fo  in  pwiQum  ,  ad  mediuwCaeli ,  &  pey 

CirfuluM  terr£  :  Confiderate  omnia  in  iino^&  finum  in  omnibus.  Ponderate,  vel  per  ratioHent 

numerentur,vel  menfur.rte  quemadmodum  Salomon  fecit  .^  vel quemadmodum  Adar.io  erat  ccn.effum 

Quod  nunc  non  potes  fed  facics)  Tunc  conclude,Ohfervant  omnia  curfim  fuum  :  fed  verbum  Domini 

res  .eji ftnipitemum.  Amate  Deum  quia  Jujini  eji.    Amate  vos  invicem  quia ju- 

flificati.  Obfervate  mandatum  Dei  quia,  eji  menfura  Jujiiti^. 

E.  K,  Jam^-enit  alter  ad  ilium,  ctmQorona  in  Capite^  qiiaji...  ^  ^  iiccipit 
gladium  MichaeHi- 

Coronatus Ecce  magna  eft  fortitudo  Dei,  8i  Prxvalcbir. 

Mich Idcirco  eji  benediaus  VeuSy  vos  jujiificati  &  hos  fanaificati. 

E-  K.  lamfaciebant  fignum  crucis  flammed  tubus  Vidltu  ,  «l7  f  nauta  nojler 
cum  noya  Ancuora  xLondmo  hodie  red'urit  nomc  efl  confilmm ,  quoa  fiatim  bine 
myi^emWy  fi  ita  ille  yeln^  &CC' 

E.K.  Redeunt- 

.Coronatus Ego  fum  de  Coelo  :  non'refpicio  terram  ;  Niiv.lomimis  rerra  per  Ca!o>  vivit. 

Of  world-       Sequimiuivoscurfum  Terrenoruni.       Prxparate  vos  femen,  Nosvoluimis,  (C)  Doniijic)  in  tc, 
lines.  efle  parati ,  cum  incremento.        Veftra  Cura  non  poteft  pn?va!erc  ,  quia  vc{}ri  Iiiimici  funt 

fortes  :  fed  quare  dedecore  afficior,  cum  fak  teireftrium  vanicatum  ?  :  Deftruat  una  vanitas  , 
aliam  :  Ait  Elefti  pr<evalebunt  in  fortitudine,  contra  ilium  Principem  Vanitacis  ,  &  Regem 
ftultorum  omnium.  QuiaDeus  nofter  eft  fapicns,  Judiciaejus  imperfcrutabilia  ,  Paticntia 
immenfurabilis.         Laborate  vos,  &c  Nos  guberiiabiiinis. 

6,  K.  Jam  recedunr. 

Vox ,Ne  difputetis  ulterius  cum  Deo  :'^i&orh  veftra  erit. 

'  Ar*^agnificetur  nomen  Dei  noftri  folius oninipotcntis  8c  optimi.    Am.n. 

"tkitrfday  26.  Of  September  we  went  to  ftiip,  and  lay  in  it  all  right  at  Anker. 
Friday  tj.     Of  September  we  fayled  from  ^/>;i«rro«gi,  and  fo  by  the  lands  end  into  the 
main  Sea,  N%E. 

Saturday 


J  true  l^elation  of  D'.  Dae  his  ABions  l^ith  fpiritSi  dtc^         3  i^ 


Saturday  28.  Of  September  we  fell  On  Holland  Coall ,  at\d  none  of  our  Marriners  ,  Mafter, 
jior  pilot  knew  the  Coaft :  and  therefore  to  the  Miin  Sea  a^'ain  ,  w  th  i^reat  fear  and  danger^ 
by  reafon  wc  couid  fcarcely  get  off  from  chat  dangerous  Coaftjthc  windc  was  ("0  fcarce  for  thstt 
purpofe. 

Sunday  2$>.  OfSeptembefwc  came  into  the  Brief-haven  ,ind  there  were  like  to  ftrike  on 
ground  :  at  length  we  came  to  an  Ankor,  and  lay  in  ftip  all  night. 

l4onday  30.  Of  September  we  landed,  and  went  into  the  Briel, 

Brie!4f  Oitobrit  2.  Mane  Hora  9.   I  ie  Mercxrii. 

E,K.  Nihil  apparccirt  Lapide ,  ncqiie  Cortina ,  nequealiud  quid.  Ore- 
ir.us  conftatiter,&c.  /pparecDomui  magnacum  multis  pinnaculis^  Valdb 
cicgancibus-  Ec  paviaicnrum  vidctur  efTc  mulcis  innatis  lapidibu^  dillin- 
dum&videntur  multi  cflTc  gradusperqaos  afcenditur;&vidttur  efle  area 
viridis  ex  dcxtra  parcc,&  ex  altera  parte  cfTe  vallis,&  rivulus  ex  alta.  Pai>  qua: 
vcr(us  folcm  eft,  videtur  quafi  noviter  fcformaca-  Ec  circa  incroitum  eft  ros 
tundum  qaoddam  s Jificium :  fcncftra:  non  (unc  fimilcs  noftris^  fed  qaaii  e(^ 
fent  Templorum  fencflra** 

A.  L.  Dixit  qu'd  videtur  ejfe  ilia  arx  Regia^  que  Cracovix  ejl, 

E.  K,  Subuo  defcendic  ignis  &  pet  cotuni  iapidem  apparec  Jam  vcnit 
Cortina  folica  ante  domum  iftam. 

Vox.  Garil  zed  mafch^  ich  na  gel  galaht  gemp  gal  n$ch  C^hanladan, 

E.  K.  Jubanladaa.  h  jamapparec  fupra  Chryftallura  :  &Chryftallus  \ids^ 
turcfT;  pcrmagnus. 

Jul),  Dens  H-fnieravit  &  dies  tues  &  fojleritatem.  {E.  K.  Refpicit  A.  L*] 

r .  K'  Jam  receflic  a  Chryftallo  vcrfiis  caput  ipfius  A-  L- 

Jub.  Et  a  penidetmnoncadetCdpilUshnnmmeratMS,  Omnia  bene  fehabent.  [Roc  dixit 
de  jiatit  rerunt  A,  L.   aptd  Lask.]        Ecee  habe •  vim  refifiendi ;  A;i  .o'ttra  leaionent  pHgno. 

A.  Perditio  te  novit ,  ic  nunJcravit  annos  tuos,  &  incipi  efle  fortis  :  Quia  illi  ell  Poteltas  Antkhrijlitt. 
data,Infcrnus  aperit  os  fmmi  contra  vos,  quia  fciunt,  quod  vos  glorificati  ericis  in  Deo.  Ego 
vici  quinrum  figillum,  &  mihi  jam  refiftitur  in  fexto.  Qn.^  Deus  facitjhon  participant  cum 
huniano  judicio.  EecenuncDifcipulosfuoscongregavit ,  Jk  docet.  O  Ccelum  &  terra 
quam  magn*  func  milcrije,  qus  vexabunt  unum  &  polluent  alterum  ?  §^ia  b  ni  Angeli  cadent 
cum  illo  &  Ccelt  Chriliuot  metuent,       Sed  illi  ad  tempus  cadent,  non  in  ptiperuum. 

A.  Salvo  judicio  f  ccIcIke  Catholicce  Orthodoxae,videtur  niihi  quod  Job  de  ejufmodi  Ange- 
lorum  timore,  five  cafu,&  reftitutione,  five  purgatione  prophetaverii,  Ca/i.  41  ubi  etiaifi  ai- 
dit  de  niiraculis  cjufdem  :  Sub  tpfo  erantradi  (ollt  y&  jiemet  fibi  aurum  qitufi  lutnm.  Antea 
dixerat.   Cum  fu'^latus  fucrit  timebunt  Angeli,  &  territi  purgabuntur,  &c. 

A,  O  Deus  quam  terribile  futurum  eft  tempus  illud,  e^cr, 

Jub .Scrilas  Deimy^ieria  ,   &  Ueo  grati.ti  agatit  pro  vefiro  falvo  flatu:  ^ia   mare  i'lie 

abunjabat  contra  vos,  &  multi  perierunt.  Ejus  potentia  pr£valebaty&  commutavit  vejirum  cuv 
funt  in  locum  illit  incognitnm  i  quia  ab  iliis  non  erat  expedatus.  Sed  fugite  ab  hac  terra  ,  araa 

Maledi&io  Dei  eji  fuper  ilUm,  Cwn  illo  eji  una  veritm  :  llle  qui  >»  ditabus  viis  erat^non  placet  Deo. 
^i  adfinem  ufi^Ue  perdurat,  quiefcit  cum  gaud:e.  Sed  ille  qui  pedem  nonponit  intet  Scorpionci 
noMpoteji  intrare  fuper  Goz,lacb» 

A,  Qu.id  hoc  ?  • 

Jub. Caudiuitinvera  fapientia; 

Jub Hor  nojhum  eji  Manna,  quo  alimur.       Sed  ego  fum  fan&ificatus  per  Creationem,  In- 

(iituti'neyn  &  (xDivina  voluntate.  ikcirco  vos  fanUifico  :  non  cum  mea  propria  [anciificati me,  fed 
illivs  Jujlitia,  qui  meam  originem  fanUificat.  Edote  Montes  in  Fide,  fed  quafi  infantes pati«ntia. 
Facite  q'ltd  Jujimn  eji,  &  ne  oblivi.ni  tradatit  vefiram  Jujiitianio 

E.  K.  Infinira;  quafi  locuftae  vcl  Aranca:  cum  faciebus  humanis  ilium 
circumvolitant,  &  quafi  ignem  in  ilium  evomunt' 

Jub Et  levai^tfe  cmtravos.         [TollendoCrucerit  fuam.^ 

Jub.  ,...,.  Fiat  J»J}itia  ejus. 

E.  K-  Jam  avolant  praecipitcs,  &  quafi  deorfum  ruentcs- 

J»b Cavete  a  fir  amine :  quia  jncenfum,tota  domum  incendit. 

A.  Quern  fenfum  hie  perpend  emus  nos :  Myfticura  ne,  an  imterialem  ? 

F    2  Jub....H«- 


3<5      A  true^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBtons mthjfirits,  6c c. 

Jub. Hommimfragilijfimarum.       Viaholuf  cumillis  fraudultnter   operatur  :   tnagna  fji 

irtercei  quietn-,  Sed  qui  apperit  forei  contentioni,  intromittit  Serpent  em.  (JUahdiGi  funt  invidi : 
^ia  ilhfunt  bened.Cn  ijinfe  mutuo  diltgimt.  Pax  inter  vosfit  j  quia  ejl  Kecejfaria.  ^ia  paci: 
inimicifuHt  potentes  contra  vos. 

E.  JC.  Jam  loquendo,  videtur  minor  &  minor  paulatim  fieri- 

A.  De  noftro  deceflu  ex  Anglia  quid  tandem  jam  Regiiia  8c  fiii  confiliarii  ftatuerunt  ? 

Jub.  ......   j^peritosfuutHy  fed /iquor  Hon  eftfatis  frigiduf.      Jam  eji  intus  calida,  neqirejlin- 

guipoteft.  Cordafuipopuli  do  fall  ivizy.  Her  arms  are  weakened,  her  legs  weaker,  her 
Ihooes  are  full  of  forrow.  » 

E.  K.  The  furious  Monftersaflailc him  again, 

Jub ^is  efi,qui  potelt  vivere,  ft  tranfgrediatur preceptum  Dei  ?  Vel  quid  de  illis  judi- 

care  vei  Sy  whom  God  imputeth  fin  unto  ? 

E.  K.  They  aflfailchim  again,  and  he  putteth  his  Crofle  toward  them, 

Jub Tk/r  Miferj  heginneth,  and  (hall  have  no  end,  till  he  that  fittethherc  do  end  it. 

E.  K.  The  Monllers  affaile  him  ftill- 

Jub 7he  wall  wuji  he  Iroken  duivn,  and  then  Jhall  It  be  [aid.      Happy  art  thou  which  haft 

dwelt  antongfl  Uf.  But  if  thou  liver  ightevjlyy  and  afcendthe  (lippery  mountaiHy  Then  tli  all  Gad 
Angli*bent  te  w/em/w/ to  them  for  thjr  fake.  Becaufeihoumayeft  be  belovedy  where  thou  art  now  defpifedy 
erit  propter  and  haji  vantjuijhed  thy  enefnies,  with  the  truth  of  vertue.  He  that  entred  into  the  lowefthelly 
C\.exmvA  and  fhed  his  blood  for  your  fins y  be  merciful  untoyoit,  and  give  you  peace  ;  which  is  the  fpirtt  of 
Det  mtjencor'  f^^-^^^^^  thatyiu  may  livey  not  like  meny  but  as  thofe  that  do  feparate  themfelves  from  the  world, 
to  the  trUe  contemplation  »f  God  his  mercies. 

E-  K-  Jam  intut  in  Caput,  A  L-  cum  flamma  ignis. 

A.  Omni s  laus,  honor,  &  gloria  fit  Deo  noflro  Omnipotenti  vivo  &  vero.     Jmen. 

thurfdayy  O&obris  3.  We  came  fromiJr/f/to  Roterodam  in  a  Hoy  of  ^w;'?fri<?»w,  to  go  with- 
in land,  here  we  lay  all  night, 

Friday,  OUobris  4.  We  came  to  tergowi  hora  3  ^  meridie  :  where  we  lay  within  the  Town 
in  the  Ship. 

Saturday,  Ocfobrii  <).  We  amchy  Harlem  to  Amfterdam  ,  and  lay  before  the  Town  all 
night  in  the  Ship. 

7uefday  OCiob.  8.  We  failed  from. Amjierdam  to  EncufetSj  and  Edmond  Hilton  went  with 
my  goods  by  Sea  toivard  frfwi^.    ,'       ■.-'. 

WenfdayyOUob.  9.  We  fet  off  from  EHcujen  ezily  :  but  by  reafon  of  a  contrary  wind,  we 
came  veiy  late  to  Herlinghem. 

Fridayy  03  b.  11.  We  went  within  land  in  little  Scutes  from  Herlinghem  (  by  Frainker  ) 
to  Lewarden. 

Saturday^  Otlob.  12.  From  Lewarden,  we  came  to  Vockjtm  (  in  fmall  Boates  )  about  3  of 
the  clock  after  noon. 

Sunday  OHob.  i  >  Apud  Vockjim  in  Frifia  Occident  alt. 

A.  Diu  Chryflallus  tanquam  lapis  nigerrimus  apparuit.         Tandem  in    ipfa  lapidis    ni- 

gredinc,  apparuithomo  nudusCrucifixus  fupcrcrucem;    fed  tamen   non  mortuus ;    Crucis 

partes  infra  manus,  omnes  fanguinolentae  videbantur.         Fafcia  linea  ciicunidabatur  Ci-rpus 

ejus,  (  a  peftore  deorfum  )&:  fines  ejufdem  fafcix  pendere  videbantur  circa  genua  :  8c  (an- 

guinoienta  apparebat .-  &  ex  quinquc  vulneribus  (  utChrifti  erat  )  videbatur  languis  gutta- 

y^  tim  cadere.       Tandem  difparuenmt  hare  omnia  :  &  quail  dcorfum  fubaderc  videbantur  5  8c 

**'  lapis  clarus  faftus  eft,&  apparebat  Cortina  aurea  :  fulsita  erat  hac  mutatio. 

E-  K-  Jam  videtur  lapis  efle  valde  magnus,  &  ante  lapidcm  dare  quidani 
magnus,  ( quafi  Michael  )  cum  gladioancipitc  cvomcntc  ignem  ex  utraquc 
acic  ejufdem. 

Mic Jufluf  &  mirahil'n  &■  per  maximus  es  tu,   0  Altifme  T>euf.        £  genulm  fltxit  htc 

dicit'}  qui  tu^i  judicia  mamfeftasy  ttt poffjs  fuper  terrani cognofci  ;  &  ut  tua  gloria  ampHfiirttfry 
ad  c  ifolationem  ecrum  qui  eledifunty  &  ad  do'.oremy  &  dtdecm  talium  qui  criicifigvnt  lumeit 
mundi  (  uitigenitum  Domini  nojiri,  Salvatoremhrmtani  generis  )  quotidie.  Ecre  portx  fr^paratjt 
fvnt  iniquitati.  Attollite  oculosy  &  videte  quo  modo  filii  homwnm  liiflti  devenerimt  effe  ■■,  qv.i* 
eorum  habit atio  eft  fada  ngra  ,  'Terra  figillata  eft  ad  eorunr  dejirudioneyit :  quia  Veum  dereli- 
qutrunt,  &filimet  ipfs  adhjtfermit  ;  &  adhuc  inpartes  diffecar.t  Servatorem  nundi  Jefum  Chri- 
ftuni  [  offtlatur  enfts  fiii  crucem  ~]  continue  cum  blafphemis  eorum  facrificiit.  Ve  illk,  qutmllos 
odio  prfffquimur  ,  &  ve  illis  qui  inter  illos  habitant  ;  quia  iniquit  ate  funt  polluti.  Orate,  dum 
inter  lUos  eftif,  qui.t  veftri  inimici funt  multiplicati,  quia  vobis  dico  nuncium  Domini  exerciuiumy 
Kegiifideiium.  Kelinquite  infantiawy  &  vivite,  &  amhuUteper  vias  prudenti^;  &  vivite  cum 
1>eoindomofua,        ^ia 'Domut  Iniquorum^  non  eft  habitatio  vel  fedes  prophanis,  w^^Wf  potcft 

Komen 


(^  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  Anions  mth  fpirits,  &c.       37 

Komen  Domini  efferri  legitime^  in  illegitima  Natione,  illegitima  fada,  quia,  dereliquermt  liatuta  ^hefe   words 
JUi0t>ti.         Hoc  dicit  Dontinuf  ;  Ego  [urn  Di'iif  JulHtix  :    &  juravt  &  uon  eji  untis  inter  il/os'^''^  '^^^ 
euivivet,  innno  ne  umanima.        ^owodo  BfjH*  ejff  devenerunt  <"  de  quibus fcriptum  eft.      Acffi^"''*  °"^' 
mtitiaPei  :  Homo  ille  fadiu  eft  pecus       Vita  illorumy  qui  devorantur,  &  taliunt  TJ^os  ignit  con* 
fuv/pfit  fedebit  in  jud/co  contra  iflam  Nationem. 

Bltjfed  and  Sana ified  ,   and  for  evermore  praifed  art  thou Judge^  which  baft  faid^  and 

Raigneli  for  ever. 

A  Si  nuiltiplicati  funt  inimici  noftri,  &c. 

E.  K.  He  is  gone- 

A.  Si  multiplicati  funt  inimici  noftri  propter  peccata  noftra  ,  ut  difficilior  nobis  incum- 
bat  lufta,  Mifcricordiam  Dei  imploramiis  ut  ipfe  noftram  etiam  raiikiplicet  fortitiidinem,  &c. 

Gab Pltick^vpyour  hearts^  bow  your  knees,  8c  audite  quas  dicii  Dominus.        Thus  faith 

the  Lord,  If  you  willprevaile  againft  the  wielded,  and  rejyce  among  the  fanBifted-^you  mult  obferve 
and  ;!^ff/'/"«o^co>«w«?;^Wf«tj',  as  are  ordained  by  the  God  ofTruthf^  unto  thofe  that  are  partak^ers 
of  his  Covenant. 

Ask,  Cou}7felof  God;  Remember  it. 

Bf-  ""^^f •  E.  K.  Gabriel  alio  noted  thtfe  Corns 

Fall  and  pray.  .  ^_,  ,■,  -. 

Be  Charitable.  mandmcnK  111  a  pair  ot  Tables,  afcct 

Vfe  true  Friendjhip  in  the  fervke  of  God.         hc  had  pronounccd  them» 

Terfevere  to  the  end. 

Are  not  thefe  Commandments  necejfary  to  be  kfpt  of  all  Chriftian  men  ?, 

d.  They  are  undoubtedly. 

Gab And  vnift  of  neceffity  be  kept  of  thofe  that  are  faithful. 

[  E.  K-  He  rtandcth  as  though  he  ftood  behind  a  Desk,  and  preached  or 
taught. '] 

Gab.  ..... .  Well  thou  fay  eft  ;  Lo  our  enemies  are  multiplied,  multiply  thou  therefore  our  (irength 

0  God.  Nature  M  fubjeSl  unto  you  for  the  name  of  the  Lord,  mt,  as  unto  Kings,  but  as  unto  th6 
Minillers  of  hit  eternal  will,  whereby  your  juliification  id  fettled  above  the  workj  of  Nature  already  j 
For,  behold,yii  participate  the  mercies  of  God  through  his  Son  Chrift  Jefus,  tn  m:  in  that  we 
open  unto  you  thofe  things  that  have  been  fealedi  even  fro/n  the  Juft,  for  the  which  we  are  become 
flaves  Unto  Corruption  ;  Jhewing  our  felves  in  divers  Jhapes,  to  the  dijhonour  of  our  Creation  :  let 
are  we  quickned  and  revived,  becaufewe  are  become  the  finger  of  God  :  and  you  are  fandified,and 
withal  juftified,  becaufe  you  are  touched  with  the  finger  of  him  that  revivetb  all  th  ngs.  Jherefore^ 
RejoycejRejoyce,  be  joyful  andfingPraifes  unto  God,  and  faint  not  :  faying.  Our  enemies  are 
rifenup  againft  us, yea,  they  are  multiplied  ;  for  thus  faith  the  Lordy  and  it  is  already  fpokfnhj) 
the  Holy  Ghoft'. 

LE'K-  He  maketh  now  great  obedience  or  reverence-] 

Foslicesfunt,quihufD^Uifpesefl. 
[  £•  K.  He  lookcth  now  up  unto  a  thing  like  a  Throne- 1 

Et  omne  opus  operatio  Dei- 
fE-K-  Now  there  cometh  a  beam  down  into  his  head,  and  he  is  C03  ^ 

vcrcd  with  a  great  thing  like  a  white  cloud-  ] 

■-»  E-K.  Now  the  Stone  is  all  on  fire-    Now  the  fire  afcendcth  upward, 
the  ftreaming  beam  ftretcheth  into  his  head  ftill- 

E.  K-  There  appearcth  a  little  woman  afar  off,  and  flie  is  fo  clear  and 
tranfparent,  that  there  appcareth  a  man  child  in  hetj  She  hath  a  Coat  as 
though  it  weie  Crimfon,  and  hath  a  long  little  face,  and  hath  a  ftrange  filk 
attire  about  her  head ^/•"  Fideturejfe  uxor  mea' 

Gab.  ...€..  Go  woman,  thy  grief  jhall  he  leffe  than  it  hath  been. 

.  •£•  K.  HabetmuUos  tanquam  parvoi  n'tgros  canes  pofl  fe.     Now  goeth 
ttie  and  tycth  their  mouths  with  packihred- 

fp  Gab So  God  ufeth  to  give  a  fna0e  to  thewick/d. 

,-.  E- K-  A  great  wind  blowcth  on  G^^riV/' 

^.  De  AngUx&meo  privato  ftatu  cupio  aliquid  audire  :    turn  ex  pietate  ergsl patriam, 
turn  propter  fam^  nie<e  rationem.  ,, 

Gab ^iefeite  pavlulum,  &  iterum  venero.       My  Lord  faith,  Let  my  fervants  i'f  "/'j  ^^hile  Ve 

and  take  their  rejt,  I  will  vifit  tjjem  forthwith  in  peace.  had  kneeled. 

A.  After 


38        A  trueB^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  JHions  mth  [pints,  *3cc. 

A.   After  a  great  quarter  of  an  hour,  he  came  again. 

E-  K,  Hcappeareth  now  clothed,  with  all  liis  garnncnt  harging  wiiti 
bells  of  G<^,  and  filming  fire  coming  from  them,  with  (ilverifli  flames. 
He  hath  hanging  about  his  Crown  as  if  they  were  ieven  Labells,  the  tops  of 
which  come  from  above,  from  an  uncertain  place  and  diftance- 

Gab Vettits  M.rvorgran.  E-   K-    He  Cillcth  WJth  3  loud  VOicC^ 

E-  K.-  Now  Cometh  a  big  black  man,  with  a  white  face,  and  after  hinra 

hath  14.   They  ftand  in  four  rows,  and  in  every  row  fix- 
Gab.  ..i...  Let  me  feethyfeale. 
(JMor Behold  power  is  given  to  me  :  Neither  is  the  liquor  that  thou  miniftreft  of 

any  tafte  with  me  ■■,  Neither  (hall  I  be  overcome,  for  I  have  placed  my  feat  here. 
Gab.  ......  hut  by  vhofe permifi  n  ?         Gag  lah  ntii. 

E.  K.  Now  ^ionp'^gtan  faPeth  downon  his  knees,  and  the  reft  on  thcif 
face-      Medicinix  De  ,m  dif,  'hUi  ia  'vera- 
E  K..   Tcy  tremble  ihat  lie  flat  on  the  ground- 
E.  K.  MoriPO'grat  Ibcwcth  to  Gabriel  on  hij>  own  left  breaft  a  Charader. 

Gab.  ......  Fur  19  moneths.        Behtld  the  will  of  God:    Becaufe  thou  halt  confpired  and  rifen 

aga  iii.t  the  Lord^  in  his  chofen^  and  hdli  [aid  ;  It  it  to  weet  thcfe  that  arefubjeS  unto  thee,  Let  us 
rife  up  agaimi  him,  and  perfecute  his  foul :  let  us  fe'-retly  entrap  him,  for,  witheut  doubt ,  he  is 
rich-  And  hecaufe y  v.r  confpiracies  are  mt  of  theft  onely  y  but  j^  alfo  3  •/  murder  :  Therefore  I 
feal  thee  with  a  weak/r  power  ;  And  ie  it  unto  th'e  axording  unto  the  word  of  Gjd,  that  jmdgetb 
Righteoufly.  Fro^ri  (vil  unto  worfe.  From  wcife  unto  con fufitn,  Fromcoytfufwnimttde' 
fperution.       From  dff'^erat  oh  unto  damnatioM.       From  dtmnation  unto  eternal  death. 

[_E-  K'  Now  Gdriel  did  put  another  prick  to  the  Character  on  his  Icfc 
breaft  ] 

(jV/ov Curfed  be  that  God,  and  defaced  be  his  power  ;  for  he  handleth  us  inuir- 

jufticcj  and  dcaleth  with  us  without  mercy  ;       Becaufe  he  is  not  merciful  nor  juft. 

£.  K.  Gabriel  goeth  from  mc  to  one  of  the  14.  and  (caleth  them-  Now 
thy  go  all  away  i  and  he  breakcth  off  the  points  of  their  Swords.  They 
go  by  him. 

A.  Quis  eft  ifte  Morvorgran,  8c  quo  modo  hsec  nobis  inftituit  inferremala  ? 

Gab Vockjtmy  thou  Jhalt  carry  thit  malice  Hnto  thy  grave:    But  I  have  made  weak^thj 

firength.  Blejfed  be  thofe  that  entertain  th  fe  tha^re  annointed  in  the  Lord  :  for  they  alfofhall 
tajieof  the  oil  of  his  mercy.  I  had  care  of  you,  faith  the  Lord,  neither  fviU  I  fuffer  youteperijh 
in  the  way  ;  Therefore  be  thankful,  and  forfakj  the  world  ;  for  the  world  hath  forfai\en you,  and 
confpired  againjiyou.     But  thefe  things  are  nothing.        Behold  lajily,  thuf  faith  the  Lord. 

E.  K.  Now  comech  a  falct  or  helmet  on  Gahriel  his  head ,  or  an  half 

fphere.  A  great  noife  of  many  voices  is  heard  as  of  Pillars  that  fell-  Now 

that  thing  is  taken  ofFhis  bead- 
Gab Thus  faith  the  Lord.       The  world  en  b»tb  fides,  fhall  rife  up  againil  thee,  and  thtj 

{hall  envy  thee, 

E.  K.  Nowcometh  a  beam  from  above  f  again  )  into  Qdriel  his  head. 

Gab Gnafemerob  Jehufan  gonfagvi  ca^nephjehftfltshemfomnadedoilb. 

E-K-  Looking  up,  he  faid  thus. 

Hoc  eft  '  |-  E.  K-  Now  cometh  about  his  hce. 

Nefavea,  repenting  ^i«le  things  of  fmoke,  and  hc  pUtlCth 

them  from  his  face-  He  would  opca 

terrore  :  &  eruentestihi  |^-^  mouth,  and   they  COmc  upon  hi* 

ptentias  Impiorum,  mouth.   They  rifcout  of  a  pit  befofll 

.„    .  him,  inumerablc.   Gabriel  lecmeth  to 

Laskjey  Vomtnus.  i  i  r 

be  as  big  as  one  or  us. 
__.         C  £•  ^- They  f warm  continually .  1 

Vomtnus 


(Utrue%elationofiy,  Dee  his  ABions  mthffirits,  dec.       55> 


[  Gab Adhuc D.  .s  lahoro  3 

[^  E.  K-    Now    comcth    another 
ftrcaming  beam  down  to  him-  ] 


Vominus  tile  Ahraham 

E.  K.  No\y  cometh 
a  fire  down  bv  the 
fame  beam  thac  came 
into  his  head. 


Now  comcth  a  bigger  fire 

down  on  him] 


[£-K-  Now  they  run  headlong 
down  into  a  great  pit  in  the  earth,  and 
one  pinchcth  me  by  the  head.  ] 


erit  in  latere  tnoy 

lAdjutormeus;^    E-K.  Look- 
ing up. 


&  cuflodiet  pdem  tuiirn  ne  cafiaris 


Spent igititr  mdominumVeum  titiim 


For   thou  /halt  overcome  5 


&  erit  tibi  Vi&oria  maximay 


in  DeOy  &  propter  Dmnty 


qui  eft  Dominm  &  Deits  exercitiam. 


E,  K,  Now  the  aforefaid  (pirits  invade  G^W^/ again. 

Gab What  I  fuffer,  is  not  lawful  for  wan  to  fee  ;  Therefore  Ceafe  for  a  while,  and  fuf- 

fice  nature  ;  But  return  and  hear  of -my  commandment. 

£•  K'  He  is  gone,  but  his  Desk  (landcch  ftill. 

,  Sunday  i  mer id iehor a  2.         Oftob.   13.  i 

I         Gab And  hereby  I  teachjoji,that  thofe  afflidions  which  yow  XuStv  in  foul  either  for  your 

offences  towards  God^  or  for  the  imperfeCtiom  of  your  mindesy  being  void  of  brotherly  ch-'ritj  to- 
wardyour  neighbours;  (  And  fo  from  you  generally  hereafjcer,   how  great,    orhowmanyfoever^ 

I  ought  not  to  be  manifefted  or  made  open  to  the  world  r  but  ferfeclly  Jhadowed  in  Charity^  ■  bearing 
your  own  infirmities,  and  fo  the  infirmity  of  others  with  r/uiet  arid  hidden  minde.  For  the  an- 
guijh  of  the  foul  is  compared  with  prayer,  dwelling  in  one  houfe  which  ought  to  laugh  with  tbe'A^orld^ 
and  to  weep  towards  heaven.  For  every  fin  is  noted,  and  the  lea't  thing  as  well  a-.nongji  the  Cele- 
ftialbodiesf  as  the  Terreliiall  is  ferfeBly  confidered  of.  For  fin  hath  his  endy  a-ridhis  end  is 
punifhment.  Andfo,  contrarywife  of  Vertue  ,  Wifdom  (  in  the  one  and  twentieth  Ent^.. .  ie  or 
L...,)  His  ground  is  upon  mildnejfe,  which  mildniffc  furifieth  the  Icdy  and  exalteth  xhe  fo:il, 
makjng  it  apt  and  ready  to  beholci  the  heavens,  receive  glorious  illiiminationSy  and  finally  Iringetb 
in  the  foul  to.  participate,  with  us, not  earthly,  but  everlafting  wifdom.  The  Son  of  God  wus 
JanUified  in  his  fiefh,  through  niildneffe,  and  vpas  mt  of  this  world,  becaufe  he  was  the  mildneffe'of 
his  Father.  Therefore  be  yon  meek^:  Be  fervent  in  meekjtfffe.  Then  Jhall  you  takeup  tb^zt 
Crojfe  which  Chni  fpok,e  of,  following  him :  which  Crojfe  is  the  Co'.npajftrn  innnldniffe  ov^r  thy 
brethren,  for  fn  fake  :  Not  as  worldlings  do,  lookjng,  but  not  lamenting.  The  other  part  is  irt 
fuffering  mildly  the  afflictions  of  the  world,  4ndfiejh  :  Hereby  you  become  Martyrs  for  that  you  wor- 

I  tifie  your  felvesj  which  is  true  Martyrdom.  :  He  th^t  forfakjth  the  world  for  the  love  of  God  ^  in 
his  Son  Chrijiijhall  have  his  reward.  But  he  that  forfakfth  hinifelf,  jliall  be  Crowned  wiih  a  Dia- 
dem of  Glory.  Thus  faith  the' Lord,  1  am  jealous  over  you,  bee  avfe  you  have  vowedyour  fehes  unto 
me.     But  great  are  the  temptations  of  the  flejhy  and  mighty  ii  hisftrength  where  the  fpirit  is  we.ik.- 

Bin 


4-0      A  tme'^^elatioti  of  D^  Dee  his  jBionsxpitbJfiritSyd^c. 

But  thus  faith  God  :  It  is  better  to  fill  up  the  Soul  with  heavenly  rontemplation  ,  and  ccelejiical 
food  ,  tu  reign  in  heaven^  and  to  he  beloved  of  him :  Then  to  pamper  the  filthy  flejh,  vhofe  delight  de- 
{irojethboth  body  and  Soul.  It  is  written.  He  that  bridleth  not  his  flefh  ,  is  given  to  riotoufneffe, 
which  U  thejieep  of  death,  and  the  fluniber  to  dejiruVtion.  But  th'n  is  true  abftinence  ,  when  con- 
temning the  World  y  u  fly  the  delight  therein  :  refainingfom  pleafures  of  the  body ,  Temperating 
the  flejhy  and  m.rkjng  it  weak^,  and  that, for  the  L:rd  his  fake.  For  the  fleJh  and  fpirit  rejoyce 
Hot  at  once.  Neither  can  the  full  belly  grone  out  true  prayers.  Feed  therefore  the  Soul  with  the 
love  of  our  fociety.  And  bridle  your  flejh  ;  For  it  is  infolent.  One  thing,  I  fay,  look^  to  your  fer- 
vants.  See,  that  in  one  houfe  there  dwell  not  delighters  in  vertue  and  holineffg ,  mingled 
with  ftich  Of  harbour  vice  vpon  vice  :  Whofe  drunksnntffe  is  abomination,  and  whofe  diet  jiir- 
reth  up  fornication.  For  wick^edneffe  is  aniongji  them  :  and  they  fear  »ot  God  ,neith  r  do  they 
abjiain,  according  as  the  holy  Ghoji  by  his  Church  hath  taught.  Maks  them  clean  :  Ihen  fhall 
you  feel  oxr  pre  fence  among  li  you.  And  we  will  all  of  us  defend  you  from  the  rage  of  wick^dneffe. 
We  delight  in  the  Go  i  of  truth  ,  and  inthe  worjhippers  of  Jujiice.  Jbus  fayeth  the  holy  Gholi  : 
Loy  I  have  made  me  a  Tabernacle,  where  the  Cod  of  G.ds  reigneth  in  Jujlice.  And  I  will  fanSife 
thofe  places  which  rejoyce  in  charity.  Mingle  therefore  your  Alms  with  charity.  And  let  jour 
prayers  and  fajiing  be  mingled  with  Alms  deeds.  For  he  that  prayeth  and  falleth  without  mercy,  it 
a  lyar.  Moreover,  let  your  friendfhip  he  fuch,  as  if  of  charity ,  and  not  of  thit  world :  Neither  for 
the  worlds  fak^e,  but  for  the  fervice  of  God  :  All  fiendfhip  elfe  it  vain,  and  of  no  acctmt.  Charity 
it  the  gift  '.f  theH'ly  Gho'i,  which  Holy  Ghoji  it  a  kindling  fire  ,  knitting  things  together  ,  through 
Chrijt  Jefus  ;  in  the  true  wif-iom  of  the  F ather  :  Which  fire  it  of  no  fmall  account,  neither  to  be  rec- 
koned of ,  as  the  Heathens  have  done.  For  happy  are  thofe  which  are  fed  with  charity:  For  it  it 
the  meat  of  lu  that  are  anointed,  which  it  the  fon  of  God,  and  the  light  tf  the  world. 
£k    /b  cha  ri  ty  th  e  foil  of  God  ? 

Gab It  it  fo:  He  that  wal\eth  in  charity  wa  \eth  in  God  ^  for  charity  it  the  will  of  the  fa- 

ther,  it  hit  own  d^ltz,ht ,  and  tllumination  of  the  faithftill ,  through  hit  Ho'y  Spirit.  The  charity 
of  the  Church,  it  the  Holy  GhojK  But  he  that  dwelleth  in  charity,  dwelleth  in  the  bioud  of  the 
Lamb  ,  which  it  the  will  of  the  father  ,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghoji.  B'tJJed  are  thofe  that  dwell  in 
charity*  Perfevere  to  the  end :  N  t  negligently,  but  with  good  will ,  which  good  will,  it  called 
fear.   Which  jear  is  the  beginning  of  wifdom,  the  firji  jiep  into  reji. 

Finis  coronat       He  that  continueth  to  the  end,  receiveth  hit  reward  :  But  he  that  leaveth  off,  it   a  damned   Sonl. 

opus.  M^ny  mn  begin,  but  few  end.         Neither  it  your  jttftificatitn  by  the  beginning,  hut  fr.m  the  end. 

Pavil  wjf  jujtifiid  :  Eeraufe  he  died  the  ftrvant  of  God,  and  not  f'.r  his  preaching  fake.  He  that 
dvelleth  to  the  end,  is  the  Childe  of  God  :  inheriter  of  everlajUng  life  ;  and  equal  with  joy  himfelf  : 
Not  the  joy  of  joyes,  but  that  joy  which  God  hath  made  equal  with  the  joyes  of  his  fon  Chrtji  ,  in  the 
company  of  the  fnthfull.  Even  in  this  plate  ,  many  perfo^is  had  confpired  againjiyoH.  But  the 
jirength  of  God  hath  fealed  them  :  And  they  fhallnot  he  unpuniflied.  For  the  Angel  of  the  Town  is 
fealed ,  and  his  fea'it  to  deihuSion  :  Thrice  curfed  are  thofe  which  dwell  within  hit  government.  But 
you  are  fafe,  and  (hall be  fafelj  delivered  from  them. 

Enelind  ^^  F  r.gland,  They  condemne  thy  doings,  and  fay.  Thou  art  a  Renegade.       For  they  fay,  TboH  haji 

defpifed  thy  Prince. 

Ene'and.  What  wuldti  thou  kjiow  of  them?       Ceafe  till  you  hear   the  number  of  their  deflruBion. 

^  ..jjj.^jj;,     Dcfire  ivhat  placur  you  will  (faith  the  Lord)  upon  this  people,   for  their  ungrateftilnefTcjand 

Vod-um  wibi    they  fliall  be  afflifted.     For  the  Lord  is  angry  with  them  :  and  he  faith  ,     Judge  you  this  wick^ed 

ttncejjafi  in-   people,  their  ToWii,  Men,  Wtmen,  and  Children  :  And  it  Jhall  be  feen  that  the  Lord  ,  the  God  of 

fertm,  ^«,       Heaven  and  E'rth,  hath  mercy  en  you. 

A    Non  nofti  a,  fed  Dei  volumas  fiat,  ad  ejus  nominis  laudem  &  honorem. 

Gab Bid  the  fires  fly  from  Heaven,  and  confume  them,  and  it  fiiall  be  done  :  Or  ,  fay. 

Let  the  Earth  fwailow  them,  And  they  (hall  per ijh.       F  r  1  have  made  Heaven  and  Earth   (faith 
thi  Lord)  ani ....  Juliice  is  for  my  people.       lama  flawing  fire  amongji  you,  and  the  Rod  of  Ju- 
jiice        Jt  is  faid.  Heave  up  thy  hands,  and  thou  ft' alt  be  heard.       The  pczce  of  him  that  is  the 
fpirit  of  wifdome  inflame  your  mindes  with  love  and  charity  ,  and  grant  you  continuance  to  his. 
glorie. 

ii.   Amen. 

Deo  JEterno,  Oynnipotenti  &  Mifericerdi  Jit  omnis  laus, honor,  &  Gloria.  Amen. 

Tuefday  15.  OAob.  We  made  hard  fhifc  to  get  from  J)ock»nt  to  Angem  by  fun  fet. 

Thurfday  17,  Oftob.  We  came  from  Angem  to  Embden,  going  without  the  Ifles  ,  and  coming  ' 
inat  Wcftcr  E»i.   We  came  before  the  Town,  by  fix  of  the  Clock  after  noon  :  but  could  not 
get  in  at  the  Gates,  and  therefore  we  lay  all  night  a  (hipboard,  but  my  Lord  A.  L.  went  over 
to  the  lodping  on  the  other  fhoar. 

Friday  18.  OAob.  We  came  into  the  Town  :  My  Lord  lay  at  the  white  Swan  toward  the 
water- fide,  and  I,  and  E.  K.  with  my  Children  and  Many  at  the  three  golden  Kcycs ,  by  the 
Englifl:  houfc. 

Sunday  20.  Oftob.    This  day  morning  about  eight  of  f  hr  Clock  we  went  in  a  litte  Hoy  from 

Embden 


J  true  Relation  of  Yy,  Dee  his  ABions  m^ith  fpirits,  dcc^         41 


f^mbden  toward  Lyre^  my  Lord  tarried  at  Embden.  VVfe  came  late  to  Lyre  :  and  the  fame  night 
wcwent  from  thence  in  a  lefTe  Scute  by  StykjhufeH  to  Oppen. 

Sunday  21.  OSioh,  By  nine  of  the  Clock  in  the  morning  we  came  to  (?/'/'?«  :  a  very  fimple 
Village?  and  from  thence  we  went  ftraight  way  toOldenhurgh. 

J'iiefday  22.  Oitob.  From  Oldenburgh^  by  Delmenhwrft^  to  Breams  :  and  vere  lodged  at  an  old 
fTidow]  her  hottfe,  at  the  ftgn  of  the  Crown. 


Sztuvdzy  Odobris  26.  Mora  i2.  fcil,  in  Meridie.  At  Breame. 

A.   The  Lord  Albert  Laskjey  being  at  Styck^hafen  behinde  usjwith  the  Earle  John  of  Embdeu 
,and  FrieflandyScc. 

E.  K.  The  Curten  feemeth  to  be  far  backward  in  the  none :  and  the  ftone 
to  be  clear  between  the  Curten  and  the  fore-part-  Under  the  Curten  I  fee 
the  leggs  of  men  up  to  the  knees. 

h.   Then  appeared  one,  and  faid  : 

11 Room  for  a  Flitter.        JefHSi  ivho  would  have  thought^  IJhould  have  met  you  here  > 

E.  K-  He  is  all  in  his  ragged  Apparel ,  down  from  the  Girdle  ficed :  But 
above  he  hath  a  white  Satten  Gcrkcn- 

A.  By  the  mercies  of  God  we  arc  here  :  And  by  your  will  and  propriety  ,  and  the  power 
of  God  you  are  here. 

II Tujh,  doubt  not  of  me,  for  I  am  h  L. 

E.  K-  My  thinketh  that  the  gravity  of  this  Adion  requireth  a  more  ^raye 
geUure,ind  more  ^rave  fpeeebss-  Bear  with  me^  though  I  fay  lb  unto 
you. 

1 1.  ...'...  If  I  Muji  bear  with  theet  for  fpeakjngfoolijhly^  which  art  but  fiejhi  andfpeak^fl  of  thy 
own  wifdom  :  How  much  more  ought eji  thou  to  be  contented  with  my  gejiure^which  it  appointed  ofhiniy 
which  regardeth  not  the  outward  form ,  but  the  fulfilling  of  his  will  y  and  the  keeping  of  his  Com- 
mandments :  which  is  God  :  whofe  wifdom  unto  the  world  if  foolijhneffe^  but  unto  them  that  fear  him, 
an  everlajiing  joy,  mixed  with  gladneffe ,  and  a  comfort  of  life  hereafter  :  Fartakjng  infallible 
joyes,  with  him  that  is  all  comelineffe  and  beauty.         How  fay  you  to  this,  Sir,  Ha  / 

i-  K'  He  turneth  up  his  heels  to  fi-  K- 

E.  K.  I  do  not  underftand  your  words :  for  becaufc  I  do  onely  repent 
yourfayings. 

II It  is  the  part  of  him  that  is  a  fervant  to  do  this  duty :  Of  him  that  watcheth  ,  to  loo}{^ 

what  he  feeth  :  For  thd  greateji  point  of  wifdom,  is,  reverently,  to  confider  thy  calling.  It  is  faid, 
do  that,i»hich  is  appointed,  for  be  that  doth  more^  is  not  a  true  fervant. 

E'K,  Hew  can  that  be  ? 

U speaks  when  thy  time  comet h.       Sir,  here  is  mony  :  butlb<tve  it  very  hardly.    Bear  with 

ne,  for  lean  help  thee  with  no  more.  Come  on  Andras,  where  Are  you  Andras? 

E,  jPC.  Now  Cometh  one  in  a  Gown  to  him-  The  Gown  is  bare  liks  a 
prentice  of  Io?2iio«5  a  youngman- 

U T)id  not  Ibid  thee  go  yonder,  and  fetch  me  money. 

-4K(/r«...,.  Whither. 

II "^his  is  one  of  them  that  forgetteth  his  bufmejfe  fo  foon  «  it  is  told  h'tin. 

Ani..^,...S\T,\  wem  halfway. 

1\'  :.„  And  how  then  ?     Spea\  on,     Speak^on. 

-<4«(i. ......  Then  being  fomewhat  weary  :  I  flayed,  the  rather  becaufe  I  met  my  friends.  The 

third  day  I  came  thither  :  but  I  found  him  not  at  home,  ^is  family  told  me,  that  he  was  newly 
gone  forth. 

I^ Andyou  returned  a  Coxcombe.        Well  thus  it  is :  I  placed  thee  above  my  fervants ,   ani 

did  what  I  could  to  promote  thee  :  and  endeavoured  dayly  to  makf  thee  free.  But  I  am  rewarded 
With  loytring,  and  have  brought  up  an  idle  perfon.  Go  thy  way,  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the  Officer.  The 
Officer  pall  deliver  thee  to  the  Prifon  :  and  there  thoujhalt  be  rewarded.  For  fuch  as  do  that  they 
are  commanded,  deferve  freedom  :  but  unto  thofe  that  loytre,  and  unto  fuch  as  are  idle  ,  vengeance, 
and  hunger  belongeth. 

E.  K.  He  taketh  him  by  the  arm,and  delivereth  him  to  a  man  with  a  ftaffe 
in  his  hand ;  and  he  putteth  him  in  at  a  door. 

G  £'  K.  Now, 


4-1      A  true  Relation  of  Y>.  Dee  his  Anions  mthjfirits,  &c. 


E.K.  Nowllhimlelf  goeth  into  a  houlc,  which  all  this  while  appeared 
on  the  left  hand. 

Il Come  OH, 

[e.  K.]  Now  he  brjngeth  another  by  the  hand] 

ll ,.  (J]'iy  thinketb  you  jhonU  be  a  fit  man  to  do  my  mefage. 

E.  K.    Now  he  whilpereth  him  in  the  car,  and  pointeth  out  h-— 

11 I  warrant  the  ma}!,be  tiot  abaped,       A  jlrange  matter. 

[Pointing  to  £.  K.]  • 

-  il,  ; 1  have  hTtfmeffe  in  Denmarkj  and  this  fellow  h  afaid  to  go  thitfjer  :  Tellfhkt  ,-thou  cc" 

meji  from  me,  and  that  I  -will  come  my  felfjhortly.    I  kjiow  be  will  do  fo  much  for  jm^,  U  hath  had 
much  acquaintance  with  me.  ..';'.  ;         .'.,'..  J  ;  ::';: 
Icare  not.yif  Ihad fomemantokeepme  Compa}}y,               ■     j 

[E.K.]  This  new  come  man  faid  /o-] 

E.  K.  He  whifpereth  again  with  this  man  in  his  car. 

\\ T'hefe  good  fellows  are  not  ready^or  elfethey  might  go  with  thee.       Go  thy  we-y  in  Cods 

name  :  See  that  you  do  your  htifineffe.       I'\eef>  fnch  fervants ,  as  none  in  all  the  Comt'rey  k,eep- 
cth.  ..■-..:  ■■ 

S.  K.  He  kecpeth  no  fervants,        ' 

11 Meddle  with  that^you  have  to  do  with  all.       1  fray  this  man,  and  that  man,  md  every 

one  deceiveth  me.        Good  Lord,  where  jhould  a  man  fiiide  a.  true  friend  now  adayes  ?       I  will  go  . 
and  tell  the  knave  that  he  provide  for  himfelf.  \  "  Ffr  if  will  be  ntarve/lpm.  k(^xd  weather.    Ton  were 
beji  to  do  fotleaji you  blow  your  Nails.         .  /       .,  ^ ,_.,    ,, 

E.  E.  He  fpeaketh  to  one  within  the' houfe.  '« 

U Thus  you  fee  me  (Majiers)  bow  I  am  troubled  with  my  fervants.       How  now  what  fiiletb  ' 

thee?  ^  ■ 

\_E.  K.  There  Cometh 'a  woman  roundabout  his  houfe,  and  fhe  fecmeth 
to  paffeby  him-    She  is  in  EngUfti  Attire.] 

Il 1  will  kjtow  what  aileth  her  to  cry.        What  aileth  thee  ? 

Woman.  One  of  my  Children  is  dead. 

Il Alas  poor  Childe  :  How  can  Children  refifi  cold?  jhe  might  have  \ept  it  wapner.     Cold 

pierceth,whereJhot  cannot  enter.  ■     " 

A.  This  woman  is  not  of  our  Company  ?  I  truft.  None  of  our  Children,  fliallperini  in 
this  cold. 

11 Hay  A,  your  Children  ?  you  kjep  them  warm  :  It  will  do  them  no  hurt.       Tljofe  that  arc 

warned,  efchue  danger  to  come  :  For  many  things  are  prevented  by  the  quality  of  wifdom.. 

A.  I  truft,  we  fhall  fafe  arrive  at  the  place  appointed,  in  Cracow,  or  elfewhere. 
Ottmiii.  ^'   ^"*^  ^^  concerning  Vincent  Seve,  brother  in  Law  to  the  Lord  Albert  L'lskJh  I  Pray  you  to 

fhcw  usthe  truthof  his  ftate.  •  TfiJ 'j:  ,'.  V,  ol -J    ,J\ 

E.K.  I  fee  him  walking  in  a  ftreeti  and  a  thick  manwitrihim;  AndGifr. 
li/h  feemcth  to  come  after  kim.  The  thick  man  his  beard  is  fomewhat  like 
my  Lord  his  beard,  he  cometh  after  Vincent,  Mineenf  hath  a  black  fatten 
Dubblct  on,  cut  with  croflc  cuts  b  He  hath  a  lufFe  about  his  neck,  a  long  one 
edged  with  black,  or  blue* 

Note.  A.  1  befeech  you.   J.  L.  to  fhew  us  what  Town  that  is. 

II Speakjng  to  him  that  jheweth  it :  for  I  fhew  it  not. 

A,  O  God. 

11 I  remember  not  the  name  of  any  fuch  Town.       Quern  Deus  non  amat,  non'  novit. 

£.  K.  Now  the  Town  appearcth  again,  the  Sea  runneth  by  it.  There  is 
an  old  rotten  Church  (landing  at  the  Town  end.  The  Town  feemcth  to  be 
6o- or  8o- miles  off- 

E-  K-  Jt  feemeth  to  be  Embden  in  my  judgement- 

E-  K..  But  Vincent  and  Ger\i(b  fecm  not  to  be  in  one  Town,or  ftreet- 

A.  I  befecch  you  to  fay  unto  us  whether  A.  L.  befurnifhed  with  money,  at  Graive  John  hi* 
hand,  fo  as  may  ferve  our  turn,  or  no. 

II If  I  have  not  told  you  already,  I  will.       Tou  grudge  at  me. 

[E.  K.]  He  /peakcch  to  E-  K. 

11 Judge 


(l/  true  Illation  of  D""^  De e  kis  JBion s  mtb  fpirits,  &  c.      43 


'■^^^R  I Judge  my  words  with  reafoii^ar.d  thou  fliah  finds  tkem   true,   'Touch  them  vchb  vnder- 

fiandingj  and  thou  (luilt  findethcni  profound.  My  words  are  true,  Bccavfe  I  am  (ent  byTrnth  : 
Neither  are  we  to  fpeak^ gravely,  when  we  take  upon  us  the  perfons  of  Bujers  and  Sellers.  JFhofo- 
ever  doth  the  will  of  his  Majhr  truely  in  this  JForld,  (hall  be  laughfd  to  [corn  :  But  whofo  fpeakfth 
worldly  and  fendeth  out  jhadows,  k  accounted  a  pillar  of  the  Earth.  Happy  are  thofe  which  are 
fiot  fooHlh,  neither  in  work^s  fay.  There  is  no  God  ;  Such  reficfi  ,  fuch  anfwer.  Such  earthly 
winde,pich  heavenly  motions.  Tet  Heaven  fpeakfth  truth,  and  the  Earth  lyeth.  Thif  is  not  my 
office  which  I  have  tal{en  in  band  ;  yet  becaijfe  I  have  dealt  with  you  as  a  worldling,  I  was  the  fit- 
t^ii  to  a7tfweryour  worldly  expeliation. 

h.  As  you  have  dealt  with  lis,  not  according  to  your  office,  but  according  to  our  world- 
ly expeftatiou  :  So  now  do  wedefire  to  undeiliand  fomewhat  according  to  our  higher  and 
heavenly  expeftatiou,  of  our  doing  the  determined  rfi//of  the  Higheth    ~ 

E-K'  He  is  gone,  and  allthcStone  as  red  as  blood.  y,^^  i^j^j . 

A- 

E  K.,  Nowheiscomeagain,  andftandeth  inthc  fire. 

II Thus  faith   the  Lord,  I  have   tanght  you  how  to  live,     I  have  fct  you  Statutes  ,  and 

have  wiped  you  wy  Peace  ;    Follow  me,andIwillbeyour  God  :     For  unto  them  that  arewifeiJha/l^upra  in  fine 
there  be  more  wifdom given  ;  But  unto  thent  that  are  become  fooli/h,  my  wifdom  i^  a  .  .  .  dtei  ij.Od.iiy 

'  thefe  five  years  to  come,  are  the  Deliverance  .    .   .  Tea,  [orrow  Jhall  bring  forth  her  ChildrenJ^^l,^"'^^^^ 
My  Hon  ur  jhall  he  defaced,  and  my  holy  Places  pluckj:.     No  man  hath  ever  feen  fitch  a  world  :    for  of /In.  1^84, 
Now  fh  all  they  fay  unto  the  Mountains,  Gome  and  cover  us  ,  and  imto  the  iVaters,  Swallow  us  up:  ijSy*  i?85, 
for  we  know  there  is  no  God  ;  neither  is  there  any  care  of  Mankind.         I  will  plague  the  peo~  '587>  1588. 
pie,  and  thsir  blood  Jhall  become  Rivers.    Fathers  pall  eat   their    own   Children,    And  the  Earth 
Jhall  be  barren  :     The  Beails  of  the  field  jhall  per jjh.     And  the  f'Vater spall  be  poifoned.     The  Air 
pall  infeU  her  Creatures,     And  in   the   Deep  pall  be   roaring.     Great   Babylon  Jhall  be  bmlty 
And  the  fon  of  wick  edne/re,y/;<z// jit  in  Judgement.     But  I  will  referve  tw)  Kingdoms  untouched. 
And  I  will  root  out  their  wick^edneffe.      lea,   thus  faith  the  Lord,     Front  the  North  Jhall  come  a¥<:om   ths 
Whirlwind,     And  the  Hills  Jhall  open  their  mouths  :     And   there  pall  a  Dragon  fi.ie  out,  fuch  as'^°'^^^' 
never  was.     But  I  will  be  glorified  by  you,  and  by  thofe  that  are  not  yet  dead.    And  you  pall 
have  power,  fuch  as  I  will  be  glorified  by.    Keep  therefore  the  Statutes  which  I  taught  you.    Forget 
not  my  words  :    For  unto  thofe  that  look,  l>acl{,,  there  is  great  wo.     Happy  are  they  that  continue  to 
the  end.  Amen. 

£.  K.  Now  he  is  gone. 

■'a 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  come  again- 

11 Thus  faith  Jehova  :  I  am  the  beginning  and  the  end.  The  root  and  life  of  all  Righte^ 

eufneffe.      I  fay  ,   (  By  my  (elf  )  I  am  with  you.  And  will  bleffe  you    in  Right eoufnejfe.      Ceafe 
therefore  to  move  me  ;  for  I  am  Almighty,  And  inquire  not  of  me,  what  I  have  determined ;    For  "'"^'"f^  ' 
Time  groweth,  and  I  am  a  Juji  God.     Therefore  Ceafe,    Ceafe,  I  fay  ;   I  in  my  felf  fay  Ceafe. 
Call  not  upon  my  name  in  defiled  places  ;     Leaji  the  wic\ed  ones  hear  what  I  deter min.     I 
•will  vi/it  you  at  your  journyes  end  ;    I  will  teftifie  my  promife  to  you.     Be  in  hafte  therefore  :  ^'^  """^  5°"'' 
And  flie  from  fin;   Andflie  thefociety  of  fuch  as  are  accurfed  :     £^  /  am  jealous  over  my  people,  "^y"*"  " 
Jea  I  will  notjuff^r  them  to  drink^or  tajie  of  their  veffels.       S^e'm^  unto  me  a  people,  that  I  may 
*hel}old  my  people  :     And  I  will  be  unto  you  both,  A  God  for  eve^ 

*'  E,K.   IL-  faith  Amen,  and  falleth  all  in  pieces,as  fmall  as  aflics- 
E-K.  Now  all  is  Clear,  and  the  Curtain  is  come  again. 

A.  Deo  Omnipotenti  fit  omnis  Honor  laus  &  gloria,in  fecula  feculorum.  Amen. 


I. 

2. 


Friday  i  Novemb.  1588.  Mane  At  Breame. 

A.  Albeit  we  were  willed  C  O  Lord)  to  Ceafe  :  yet  underftanding  the  fame  warning  to 
have  been  meant  for  EnquiringoU thy  Myjieries  andfecret  Determinations,  wherein   we  intend 
now  not  to  deal,  but  in  matters  before  and  laft  moved,  and  wherein  we  were  not  fully  fatis- 
fied  ■■,   that  now  we  may  more  exprefTely  be  certified,  and  that  is  of  three  things. 
•     Firft  for  Fiiicent  Seve.  '' 

Secondly  for  Edmond  Hilton,  gone  with  the  Ship  toward  Dansk^. 

And  Thirdly,  as  concerning  help  for  money  for  the  Lord  Alb.   Laskje.     And   herein  we  ^* 

crave  either  the  miniftery  of  Jubanladteck,  or  of  II,  orwhom  foever  clfe  it  fliall  pleafethy 
Majeftyiofend.  i- 

E.  K.  A  man  with  a  black  Gown  appeareth  v\ith  a  Cap,  falling  in  his 
neck,  with  a  big  Book  under  his  arme^ 

A.  It  (liould  feem  to  be  Aphlafben,  my  good  Angel. 

E.K-  He  hath  a  white  Kobe  under  the  black  Gown,  which  goeth  all 

G   i  under 


44        A  tmel^elation  of  D"*.  Dee  his  JUions  whfpirits,  &C. 

under  hisGown^  nailing  behind  him  ;  but,  ihc  whice  Robe  trailcth  noCj 
his  Gown  hangech  on  him  ,  as  chough  ic  were  faUing  ofF  his  (boulders 
behind. 

A.   In  the  Name  of  Jefus^the  King  oPGloryj  are  not  you  Afhlafben  ray  good   Angel,  bjr 
tlicmercy  and  power  of  God,  fo  alllgned  ? 

d- K-  Helookeih  very  ancicndy- 

Inipire,  Moll  high  Glory,  andthank^s,    thronghont  all  Creatures,    he  v.nto  thee  {0  eternal 

Godyfirji  .  .  .  Secondly  redeci^ihig,  atidjbirdlji  fanaifyhig  the  IForld  in  hh  Creation,  NoWjand    ■ 
for  ever  :  And  at  long  as  it  Jhall  be  [aid  Ofanna  tn  the  ^ire  of  the  High  God  ....  Amen. 

A Amen Amen Amen.  • 

Maui  fold  are  the  Merries  of  God  towards  man,wbofe  bafeneffe  deferveth  no  fuch  grace  and 

moliv.nf^enkjible  Hejftiig  :      But  fuch  is  God  ;  what  he  ]i<jiifieth  hi»ifelf,in  the  jhength  of  his  niercyy 

and  heveth  his  honour  with  his  own  holinejfe.     For  n'hat  is  ruan,   that  can  pijiifie  htmfelf  ^    or  that 

hath  any  thingywherein  his  bowels  can  rejoyce  ?  JVhtrein    can  he  determine  happinejfe  lo  himfelf? 

Or  how  canbe  compare  himfelf  with  the  trees  that  are  fruitful  ?       If  the  life  of  vtan  be  Jin,  then    . 

is  it  hateful.      But  who  is  he  that  hateth  it  ?  But  even  he  which  is  above,  and  is  fartheji:  from  ini- 

(juity.        Great,  therefore  (  0  man  )  are  thy  miferies,  when  naturally  thou  art,   and  loveji  to  be 

hated  of  GQd,wbofe  ferviceis  Jujlice,  and   who fe  delight    Peace.       Cenfider  therefore  the  Mercies 

vf  God,  through  his  loving  kjndnejfe  towards  thy  weakjieffe  :    And   ack^novrledge   his  Power  which 

jiiakeththofe  iirongwhich  have  no  force  of  thenifehfs.       Gather  not   up  your  own  inventions  ;  But 

be  faithful  fervants,perforntiHg  the  will  of  him  which  fandifieth  you  with  obedience  :  for  of  dufi 

you  are  become  fiefh,  and  of  fieJJj  the  fervants  of  fin  ;   that  at  length  you   might  be  made  freey  . 

through  your  own  confents  in  the  mercies  of  him  which  hath  entred  into  your  weakjteffe,  and  weighed 

out  his  blood  for  your  Redemption  :    Even  he  which  hath  payed  the  iittermofi  penny  of  your  Ranfonie. 

And  why  ?  Nn  to  the  intent  you  Jhould  brag  of  your  felves.       But  hath  charged  in  conditienyou 

Jhould  maintain  juliice  into  tbeworkj  of  Righteoufnejfe.      Vnto  whom  is  Heaven  a  feat  ?  britunto 

fuch  as  are  faithful  fervants:    Wherein  the  Dignity  of  your  Majler  is  kjtown,  of  whom  it  is  f aid, 

Bleffed  are  thofe  thatferve  the  God  ofHofis,        if  any  thing,  now,  happen  u:ito you,  that  is  the  riches 

of  your  Majler,  Be  thankful  for  it,  and  conftder  his  liber  alitie  :    And  how  much  the  more  he  openetb 

his  "Treafures  to  you,  Befo  much  the  more  thankful;   For  unto  fuch  belongeth  the  ownerJJ)ip  of  viorey 

and  the  reward  of  fuch  as  are  ten  times  faithful.     Happy  are  thife  to  whom   it  is  fa  id,  Thou  good 

fervant.      Be  no  Gadders^  for  there  is  no  houfe  to  the  houfc  of  your  Mifter»      'lake  heed  alfo,  ieajl 

you  ininijtcr  his  bread,  to  fuch  itf  are  his  enemies,  andfo,  unworthy  :  for  unto  both  thefe  belongeth  the 

reward  of  unfa  it  hfulnejfe.       Be  not  high-minded,  when  you  borrow  your  riches,  lejl  the  moths  enter 

in  and  corrupt  your  garments :  for  Pride  is  the  dephoffin  ....  Ceafe  not  to  rehuKf  the  dijhonour- 

ers  *  as,  o  ....  Neither  maintain  the  honour  of  any  other  :.  For  he  that  enterta'nteth  you,  hathfeal- 

edyou  for  others.    And  hath Jlrengthened  you  with  Authority,  "the  Rod  of  his  Juilice.     Generally 

thefe  things  have  been  fpok^n  unto  youy  and  thefe  Leffons  are  not  yet  to  learn  :     But  happy  are  thofe 

whom  God  fanSfifiethi  beingunholy,   Andten  times  hleffed  are    the  Temples  wherein  his  Holineffe 

dwelleth.     True  it  is  as  thoufayeji :   Generally  men  are  fan&ified ,  the  people  of  the  Earth  ihrough 

all  Nations,  myjtical/y :  through  the  mercies  of  God  :     But  where  the  fan&ifieation  agreethmt 

with  the  thing  fandified,  there  eMreth  wick_edueffe.     The   Spirit  of   God  is  not  fan&ified  in  Hell, 

Neither  is  his  holy  Temple  beaiMj^ed  with  the  feet  of  the  unrighteous.      It  is  ivritten,,  Dogs  honour 

not  bread,  neither  defiled  place's  things  that  are  holy  :     For  as  Hell  dijhonoureth  Heaven,  in  re- 

fped  of  unrighteoufnejfe  :  So,  thofe  that  are  wicked  dijhomur  the   vertuous,  and  fuch  as  are  tritely  ' 

holy,by  fociety  :   and  they  jlink^of  their  wickjsdnejfe.     For  it  is  Written,    And  Satanwent  from  the 

prefenee  of  the  Lord,  leaving  a  flinh^behind  him.     The  light  of  the  Sun  is  ta^en  from  the  Earth, 

by  the  congealed  cloud.     The  fins  of  the  people,  and  filthincffe  of  places,  are  put  between  vertue  and 

the  things  Sacramental.      Therefore,  it  is  not  true)  that  thou    maycft  lawfully  call  upon  the  . 

Name  of  God  in  unhallowed  places. 

A.  1  crave  pardon  for  my  ignorance,  and  errour  herein  :  But  I  required  not  to  know  of 
the  heavenly  Myiteries  ;  Onely  fueh  thin^^s  I  demanded  information  of,which  not  onely  were 
above  humane  power  toanfwer,  (  and  fo  might  feem  worldly  myfteries  ;  )  but  alfo  the  true 
good  news  of  them,  might,  many  ways,  be  comfort  unto  us  and  ours. 

Behold  iaifrael,  the  rough  (tones  are  acceptable  Altars,  And  the  flinkjng  Caves  have  been 

known  unto  the  Lord.  And  why  s"  Becaufe  the  place  was  holy,  neither  this  filthinejfe  here,  nor  of 
any  thing  elfe  created,  hindreth:  But  the  filthineffe  of  the  place  and  Country  wherein  thy  are  de- 
filed; for  inpure  places,  the  defiled  are  bleffed.  David  fanUified  Szn\,  with  the  prefenee  of  his 
Annointing,  and  his  Harp  fpake  out  the  wonders  of  the  Lord-  PVe  come  unto youhere,becaufe  the 
willof  God  inyoujhineth  :     But  the  filthineffe  of  this  Country   ohfcureth   the  beauty  of  our  meffage. 

Not  that  it  is  obfcured  in  us,  hut  hindered  through  wick, from  you.     Therefore  flee  the  company 

ef  Drunkards,  and  fuch  as  we their  own  underjlanding. 

[  E-  IC  He  hoJdcth  up  his  face  and  hands  to  heaven- ward-     ' 

......  Drunkjtrds  and  fuch  as  defile  themfelves  are  apt  to  l-jiow  things  worldly  ;  not  as  wife  men 

do: 


A  true  Relation  of  D''.  Dee  his  Actions  mth  fpirits,  dcc^        4"^ 


do  :  I'lit  th.it  the  H''orld  may  be  a  plague  to  their  htujuitj.  Thou  defireli  pardon,  and  caUedll  th... 
biifmcffe  a  vDorldiy  mjjtery.  But  the  mjfieries  of  this  world  tire  put  under  the  feet  of  the  faithful  : 
which  (^overfeen  through  God^  are  generally  comforted  and  direcled.  Then,  therefore  what  cure 
remaiiKth  either  of  the  Seas,  or  of  the  flimy  Earth  s'  where,  on  the  one  fide,  thou  regardeli  the  Ship, 
and  on  the  other  fide  Uiioncy.  I  fay  unto  thee,  God  correcicth  this  world  and  the  cajiialties  thereof, 
leji  thofe  that  are  o^^  thee,  (hbP.ld  blaffheme  his  name. 

Zi.  Bleffed  be  his  holy  Name,  and  his  Power  niagiutied  for  ever. 

T'hy  goods  are  fafe.  And  the  Earth Jhallfrovide  for  you.      Be  not  you  careful;  for  unto 

thepi'f,yea  even  the  hairs  of  his  head  are  numhred.  J  am  filen't  for  the  JFor'd  ;  for  it  is  not  my 
■propriety  :  But  notwithjianding  ask^  and  thoujhalt  not  be  denyed. 

A.  As  concerning  Vincent  Seve  ,  his  fta.te  and  being,  we  are  very  defirous  to  be  in- 
formed. 

E.  K-  yincent  Ssy'e  appe^reih  here ,  going  down  by  Charing  Croflc» 
There  is  a  tall  Fellow  with  a  cue  herd  v\'ith  him  in  a  jkic  coloiived  cloak, 
V/Victf ;' haih  a  great  FuflP-  This  man  waitech  on  him  with  a  5word.  He 
is  going  down  into  V^efiminfler  Ward  :  He  is  now  calking  wi:h  a  Gentle;s 
man  on  horfcbackj  who  hath  five  men  following  him,  with  Caps-clo.iks 
Ihort,  and  muftachcs  j  And  he  on  horfe  back  is  a  lean  viiaged  man  with  a 
fhorc  Cloak  and  a  gilt  Rapier  j    his  horfe  hath  a  Velvet  foot-cloth. 

E-  K.  In  Twc^M?  his  forehead  is  written  j  Where  pother  li?antsth,  rigor 
veakneth. 

E.  K-  ^j««nrlaugheth  heartily  ^  and  fiicweth  two  broad  teeth  before. 
He  holdech  a  li:tlc  ftick  within  his  fingers  crooking.  On  his  left  hand  he  hath 
a  skar  of  a  cut,  on  the  nether  fide  of  his  hand-  Vincent  hath  a  pair  of  bootes 
on,  which  come  ftraight  on  his  legs, and  vcr^  clofe.  A  great  many  boats 
appear  at  White-BaU,  One  is  graffing  in  the  Garden  there.  Many  people 
are  now  coming  out  of  Wefiminfier  Church.  The  Gentleman  on  horfc- 
back  alightcth  now,  and  goeih  down  toward  the  Court  bcfoicVJefimiftJlcr- 
Hall.  He  goeth  now  up  a  pair  of  Itairs  ^  and  there  ftandeth  a  fellow  with 
a  white  ftaff-  Vincent  is  gone  in  with  him ;  The  fervant  walketh  without. 
The  fervant  gocch  to  a  Waterman  there.  The  Waterman  ajiketh  him,  whes 
ther  that  be  he ;  that  is  the  ^olairtd  Bi(hop  ?  The  fervant  askcth  him,  what 
hath  he  to  do  ?  Now  the  fervant  goeth  from  the  Waterman.  Now  coni- 
eth  one  down  the  ftairs,  and  faith  to  the  Serving-man ,  that  his  Mafler  ftiall 
be  difpatchcd  to  morrow-  The  fervant  faith,  He  is  glad  of  it.  Now  all 
that  Shew  is  vanifhcd  away. 


Now  come  there  two  handfomc  men ,  they  have  Cloaks  on  their 
fhonlders,  and  they  have  hats  on  like  Tankard  Crowns. 
Oneofthefefaid, 

A Iiwderflajtdby  the  King,  that  he  heareth  him  great  favour. 

The  other  faid, 

•    B But  Kings  rohen  they  become  rich,  ivax  Covetous.     But  do  you   thinks  he 

will  come  this  way  .<? 

A Tea  mary,  if  he  be   rvife-,  for  he  Jhall  find  no  better  friendpip  than  in 

Denmark.       Here  is  thefellovp,  he  hath  brought  a  bag  of  Amber. 

E.  K-  Hetaketh  the  fellow  by  the  fhoiilder,  and  faith;   Come  away. 
He  hath  been  an  old  doer. 

E- K-  Now  th:y  are  gone,  and  that  Shew- 

E.  K-    Now 


' r—t 1 .    I    Ity  I    \  .11  , . 

4^        J  tme'J^eLition  ofD\  Dee  his  JB'tons  mth/firits,  6c c. 


Vl»  "^    "^ 


I'.r. 


E.  K'  Now  is  the  firft  man  in  the  black  Gown  come  again. 

Thiif  yon  fee^  the  World  anfwereth for  the  World.     Be    merciful.     Flee  privy  leakfs  ;  for 

the  Devil  is  ready  at  every  corner'.    Be  Humble  and  Obedient.     'That  receiving  the  reward  of  true 
fervai:ts,yOH  may  rejoyce  as  Enheritors  of  everlaibng  freedom  ;   the  reward  of  fuch  as  are  faith''    k 
fid  t)  '.hi  end.     God  grant  you  may  fo  be.        Amen.  ^    < 

E-  K-  Nowcometh  the  Vail  again  which  all  this  while  was  gone  be- 
hind the  Scone- 

A.    Deo  noftro  Omnipotenti3mifericordi,&  jiiftofit  omnis  honor,  laus,  &  gratianim  aftio, 
nunc  &.  in  fccula  feculorum.        Amen. 


A.  While  we  were  at  Bream,  among  many  other  things  told  and  delivered  to  E.  if.  as  he 
was  byhimfelf,  by  a  fpiritual  Creature,  I  know  not  who,  nor  of  how  good  eftate,  or  what 
cftatehe  was  of  :  This  parcel  among  them  he  held  in  writing,  and  imparted  to  me  j  And  F 
thought  my  painsnot  ill  beftowed,  to  keep  the  fame  in  record  here.  -A  I 


Two  years  and 
a  quarter,(lia!l 
he  An   1581?. 
in  January. 


Ganiluf  that,  in  houfe  moft  fiery  fairer  than  the  Sun, 
Hath  honour  great,  faith,  give  place,  your  former  courfe  is  run  5 
Therefore  firft  framed  clouds  unknown  draw  near  with  mighty  ftorms. 
Wherein  fuch  bodies  lie  obfcur'd,  or  take  ten  thoufand  forms. 
Your  bellies  ftrowtinglong  difclofe,  and  on  the  harlot  earthj 
Seem  fair  toman,  as  when  the  waves  as  MidvVife  help  ...  r  birth, 
Twice  jhall  the  Sun  put  on  the  heavens,  and  once  look,  (]uarter  way^ 
And  workjng  uncouth  woMiyhtiild  up  a  City, where  men  fay 
The  Holieft  flood  :  AndBeares  bring  in  ufurping  fire  at  hand. 
And  people  fpread  return,  vvhofenew  built  altars  flaming  ftand, 
Whilfl:  fuch  as  ftrangers  were  Catejy  cry ,  and  bloody  knife. 
With  privy  fhame  defil'd  bckyes,  a  thing  n  ...  fometime  rife. 
Prom  midnight  unto  noon,  two  parts  and  more  (hall  flaughter  feel, 
And  all  the  World  from  South,  tafte  all,  down  force,  of  fire  and  fteel. 
Small  wonder  though  the  earth  at  (hadows  fighting  nothing  grieve. 
When  mighty  Seas  (hall  dry,  and  heavens  lie,  who  can  live  ? 
That  mortal  eyes  (hall  fee  a  Temple  built  with  precious  Stones, 
Or  Creatures  ftrange  made  new  in  fight,  of  old  and  long  dri'd  bones. 
Or  Angels  dwell  on  earth  :    but  I  whofe  firy  fingers  can 
llnloofe  thrice  fealed  Books,  and  utter  worlds  unknown  toman. 
J  feethefecurfed  wights,  whofe  borders  lead  thy  journey  on. 
Shall  with  the  thirtieth  moneth,be  bought,  or  fold,  or  fully  gone. 
And  England  -per ifli  firji  with  Moths  long  harbour  in  her  skirts. 
The  Spaniard  lofe  their  King,  and  France  rebel  and  fallbyfpirts. 
And  holy  man  ten  dayes  beiieged  at  home,  with  thefedayes  whelpsj, 
,  Till  he  at  length  made  free  by  fudden  force  of  vertues  helps. 
The  Foliflj  King  hath  play  edy  and  friendly  manfhall  then  bear  [way, 
Amongft  earthly  friends,  and  fuch  as  hope  of  former  faith  decay. 
At  laft  wear  higheft  Crown,  if  fall/row/  vertue  makes  no  loffe. 
And  midft  this  coil  to  come  in  fpace  of  new  come  layfor  tofTe. 
Thenlo,  Come  other  times  mod  Holy,  and  a  Kingdom  /hall,  . 
From  Heaven  come,  and  things  forthwith  again  to  Order  call. 


■'  -»'  ■ 


i 


;•! 


Saturday  2.  Novembrhwe  rod  from  Bream,  two  great  mile  to  a  Nunnery  called  Oftarhold. 

[Sunday  Novembris  ■^.  we  c-dn\e  to  Fure  or Fureden.  '  ' 

Monday  tiovenib.  ^^.  ■vitC'AXwe.ioheA  to  Fiarburgl}. 

tuefday  Novemb.  5.  we  came  to  Buxtenhaden,  ajid  there  by  9  of  the  clock  in  the  mornintT 
we  took  waterin  two  great  Skutes  or  Boats,  Horfe-wagon,  and  our  fluff  and  all,  and  ferryed 
down  the  little  water,  till  we  entred  the  Elh,  and  fo  cio/Ted  flraight  over  to  Blanken  nafen  : 
there  dined,  and  afterdiimer  by  coaches  we  came  to /Y/rwZ-wg^,  where  n»y  Lord  lay  atthe, 
Engli(h  houfe,  and  we  at  another  lodging,  a  widows  houfe.  •  -^ 

fyenfdaji  Novemb.  6.  wt  rid  to  Tritiow  i^imlcdom  Hainbjirgk,  a  little  Village,  having  left 

my 


(^  true  Relation  of  D''.  Dee  his  Mions  mth  fpirits,  6cc.       47 


my  Lord  behiiide  :  and  a  Ifo  milling  my  Cliildren, and  fervaiits  j  which  were  gone  before  us  an 
other  way  to  my  great  grief:  till  by  midnight,  by  fending  out  lueflengers  to  liften  and  en- 
quire after  them, I  heard  of  them.    I,  my  Wife,  Rowlaud.Niirfe,  and  Mjrcopskje,  my  Lord  his 


man. 


7hur^iay,  Novemb.  7.    We  came  to  LnheK  ,  and  were  there'  at    Innc  ,  at  the  figne  of  the 
Angel,  or  rather  St.  Mkhael  ,  at  a  Widow  her  hctife ,  a  very  hoiicit  Hoitefle. 
.  Saturday:,  Novemb.  (?.  /received  Leefcrsfronitb^  Lord  Albert  LmkJe,oi  the  Englifli  rrx^m 
ill  dealing,  and  confulting  with  the  Towuf-meu  of  H^wiwg*  for  iuy  flay,  and  conveying  back 
again  into  £«?/<!«>/,  &c.  '.     ,,  ,;    ••   .-^ilr -'    .      vi  ;   ..      • 

Wednefday,  1 3,  NovembriSy    i'^'^f^  ^:\J^^a'nHora^pl!''^  -  'At  Lubekj. 

Ter  horam  fere., per  intervalla^  vari.ts  fecmiis  fetit,iones&  f<epe  oravimiK. 

At  length  appeared  a  fwordj  two  edged,  firy,  or  rather  bloudy,  andabunfh  of  rags  hang- 
ing at  the  top  of  it.  The  rags  feemed  of  Wo6llen,and  LinnenCloath  :  like  a  bundle  of  Rags 
gathered  out  of  a  Taylers  fliop.  .  Thefword  ftood  upright  in  a  manner,  but  leaning  fioin 
E./f.  his  face,  though  it  feemed  to  fmite  at  E.  if.  'kj;.;vv.iv,  ,  .        "  ^tnY-^ 

A  voyce.  So  be  it,  (0  Lord)  for  than  art  mighty.  Be  itfo  mftfthein  ':  For'^ey  have  errtbtAce* 
anHirlotj  and  have  forgotten  thy  jealoufie.  '        ' 

£.K-  The  fvvord  ftiaketh  mightily.  • ';  Many  arc  the  Harlots  chat  fvvarm 
upon  the  earchj  and  mnumorable  arc  their  Childrcn^and  fuch  as  they  fofter. 
Their  reward  is  ready . 

E.K'  The  fword  now  (haketh  again  mightily- 

He  that  entreth  into  the  hopfeof'the  wickjdk  defiled :  but  he  that  cotfentetb  with  an  Har- 
lot ii  occur  fed.    He  that  delighteth  in  her  fecrets,  Jhall  be  Jiabbed,     ■  And  Le^rofie  Jhall  dwell  in  his 

houfe  fir  ever.  '"  '  '■j!^  ■'         '■'.', 

A.    O  Lord,  I  truft,  this  refpefteth  none  of  Ui-,  in  commojiTenle  to  be  underftood. 

He  that  delighteth  in  light, loveth  not  himfelf  ihtt  defireth  the  hve  of  hint,that  iUuntinateth  : 

But,  thus  faith  God,  I  fp'll  not  dally  yHith  you  -.Neither  (hall  you  handle  me,asyouhave\done.  For, 
your  Horedom,  u  wtlfnll :  and  your  vanities  fPorfe.  But  this  1  leave  amongjl  you',  that  you  Jhall 
kjiow  that  I  ant  righteous.  For,  he  that  defpifeth  me ,-  k  accmffd  ;  and  unto  hint  that  - dijfembleth 
wyfajhien,  are  wiferies  vpithoutnuniber\  '"'So  ,mtoth^t^,that  enierhtothe  ho'hfe  .of  blnfpheniy,  is 
vengeance  ready  at  hand.  ~  '  .      .    '      '  '  \^        ' 

b..  O  Lord,  what  is  this?       Man  is  but  earth,  Vf here  tht heavens  dw^H^f'^^^ekhef         th^ 
works  of  man  acceptable,  but  with  righteoufneffe.  ......     j.    . 

F'  K.  There  appeareth  a  man  with  a  Bible  about  his  neck,  like  a  Doiftor; 
and  he  ftandeth  miferably  in  fire,  .And  fo  like  wile  appeared  divers  other 
withJBibles  about  their  necks,  and  chey  in  fire  likcwife-  StilJ  come  flames 
from  the  earth,  and  cncrcafe  the  flamciJ  ofchefe  men  about  thbhi-  There 
appeareth,  and  cndlefle,  •  • .  me,moft  terrible  with  fire ,  and  other  moll  his 
deous  lihews„ ....  They  be  fuddenly  gone  away.  And  all  thefe  men  be 
now  no  more  in  fight. 

A  voyce.  Happy  are  th'/e  that  fee^  and  can  remember.  Elrffed  are  thofe  that  hear ^  and  art  not 
forgetfulL  aobrioirv;^;.;!     ... 

A.  Thefe  words,  and  fiiews,  O  Jefu,  make  evident  what,  ^',^_,. «  ,      .^ ';wvv,    ' ..  ji '»f;^V  " 

£•  K'  All  is  gone,  except  the  fword  which  ftandeth  in  a  Cloud,  and  there 
cometh  a  hand  and  letteLh  a  leal  upon  the  fword- 

A  voyce.  I  brought  you  from  iniquity,  to  the  intent  you  might  be  purified  :  But  the  more  I  cleanfe 
you,  the  more  you  are  defiled. 

?  have  offered  of  old,  and  it  jhall  be  told.        I  have  promifed  ,  and  it  Jhall  be  performed. 

Hou  have  notkspt  7ny  Commandments.  And  therefore  you  jhall  be  plagued.  He  that  goeth  out 
of  the  way,  jljall  receive  the  reward  of  err  our.  For  fir  agglers,  are  fpotted  people.  And  none  caH 
he  hleffed,  but  fuch  m  dwell  in  the  "Fahernacle  of  righteoufneffe.  But  behold  ,  /  will  tell  it  unto  yoH 
but  with  greater  hardnejfe.  And  I  will  makfyon  kjiow  me,  before  I  vifit you  in  kjndneffe.  For 
thus  fayeth  Sathan.  Lo,  they  erre  jiUl.  Do  Jujiice  for  thy  glory  fakf.  Ikey  enter  into  the 
houses  of  Idols  :  And  laugh  with  blafphemers.  Jhey  are  filent  ,  when  thy  name  is  blafpbemed. 
F>eal  with  them  as  a  God :  or  elfe  thou  art  not  righteous.  Therefore,  he  free  from  Sathan  ,  that  he 
irtay  praife  your  righteoufneffe.     lea,   that  he  may  fay  ,  as  he  hath  faid.         Let  me  touch  thern. 

Vntill 


4§         A  trueKelation  of  D^  Dee  his  J&ions  mthfpirits,  &:c, 

Vntill  then-,  1  yvill  be  jttii.  I  will  not  forget  this  wickjidneffe  ,  tillj/'At  be  wade  clean.        For.,  heboid^  ' 
J  have  fealed  it  :  and  therefore  it  rnvji  be  finijhed.    For  what  is  fealed  of  me ,  cometh  to  ptrjfe. 

A. 

A  voyce.   He  that  d^ffembleth  the  image  of  Ckrijij  it  a  liar. 

A. 

......  Nf'W  Cometh  a  grave  man-,  all  cloathed  in  white^  with  a  Mytre  upon  his  head. 

Ike  God  of  peace  is  a.  comforting  Medicine  .,  to  fuch-^cK  delist  in  him.     Ihe  peace  of  the-, 

•ftorld^  is  the  image  of  God  :  God  and  many  which  is  JefusChriJi,  the  foH  of  the  living  Cod  :  Which' 

kjiit  With  the  father  m  the  fpirit  of  truth  ,  (proceeding  from  them  both everlajiing  yfilli)   ope-- 

ned  hit  mercies  to  his  Jpoftles,  replenijhing  them  fully  and  mightily  with  the  will  of  the  father^  to  the 
roKifcrt  of  the  wnld  :  JVhichy  made  mejfagers  thereof ,  have  delivered  to  the  Church  ,  full  and  per- 
feU  Statutes  (^is  the  Will  of  him^whereunto  jhe  is  united  and  married)  to  be  kept  inviolable  ,  and 
without  transgreffiou,  7hit  Will ,  Covenant ,  or  Decree,  (fealed  unti  the  end  of  the  world  in  the 
number  of  the  faithfitH)  whofeever  breakjth,  or  diffembleth^is  accurfed,  or  damned.  Therefore  faith 
tin  word  of  God  unto  youilLou  have  runajtray,  you  have  entred  into  the  hovfes  of  Idols.  I  have  brought 
vo^  from  fire,  but  you  are  entred  into  flames.  And  why  f  Eecaufe  you  defile  your  felves  with  the' 
wicked  nejfe  of  deceivers  :  Wkofe  images  yo:tfaw  affirmatively,  though  mt  verily:  Continually  over- 
whelmed with  daily.,  and  inextinguible  flames  :  Continuing  even  fo  long  ,  as  their  errour  is  exalted  ;- ' 
Tea, even  in  the  prof effors  thereof  y  to  their  eternal  damnation.  For  as  Chrifl  ,  and  hit  Vo- 
Urine  is  light  and  truth:  So  feemthe  impofitions  of  Sathan  to  agree  ,  or  tak^e  unto  themfelves,  fhapes- 
or  lik^neffes  of  the  true  image  of  him  that  faveth :  Whereby  be  trujieth  in  himf elf  under  the  colour  of 
tneckjtejfe,  into  the  companie  of  the  faithfull :  Devouring  their  Souls  with  ravening,  dijfemblingy  and' 
falfe  Itkelyhcods  of  truth  ,undblctohe  decided  by  man.  Happie  are  thofe  that  believe  them 
not  '.  For  he ,  even  he  it  is,  that  is  a  liar  ,  and  is  oldeji  in  deceit.  But  as  the  father  is  eternal: 
So  it  the  fen  eternal ,  which  eternity  of  the  father  and  the  fon  ,  it  the  holy  Choji  eternal, proceeding 
equally,  as  the  finger  of  God,  and  fpirit  of  truth,  to  the  general  workjnanjhip  of  Gods  determination 
kjtit  to''ether,  three  Ferfons.  [E.  K.  He  maketh  a  great  reverent  ciirfie^  in  this  omnipotency 

ly  rpiritual  illumination,  and  through  the  holy  Ghoji  delivered  unto  the  Apoiiles,  as  the  pledge  of  GoeL 
/SEecUfix  ^'^'  mercie  and  promife,  is  alwayes  certainly  linked,  yyned,  and  engraffed  into  the  fociet/  of  thofe 
Cb'ip.  that  fulfill  the  will  of  the  higheji  perfedly,  and  without  errour,  whofe  jirength  Jhall  continue  y    and 

ghrie  branch  out,  even  unto  the  end  of  this  world,  and  beginning  of  comfort*        Therefore  ,  believe  : 
For  the  fpirit  of  truth  worketh  wonder s,raifeth  the  dead,  and  hath  power  to  forgive  fins.        Through 

the  power  of  him,  unto  whom  it  it  ma For,asCkriji  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth  deli- 

i)(red So  hath  he  delivered  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  to  his  true  Church.        Therefore  fhe 

cannot  erre.         For  where  power  it  without  meafure,errour  hath  no  number  :  Believe  not  therefore 

thofe  that  lie  '.faying  y  The  Church  of  God  it  infeQedwith  err  ours.        For  the  o  fences  of  few  are 

rt  c-    •  <v,     not  counted  errour,  but  unrighteoufnefe  :  Neither  .can  the  ftragling  feet  of  a  few  drunken,  bring  in- 

^rSg."     ^'  /" "(?  ^0  the  whole  hoHfe. 

A* 

......  It  lieth  not  in  my  power  to  deliver  you ,  or  reconcile  yov  from  death  and  Hell :  The  tormen- 

try  and  filthineffe  of  the  world,  and  the  wrath  of  God.  But  yet y  (That  Cloud,  fet  afide)  which  it 
between  me  and  you')  I  fpeak.  a  far  of  to  you  ,  faying.  The  Juliice  of  God,  is  vengeance  it  felf: 
Neither  hath  it  any  contraryybut  even  in  the  midji  y  and  Centre  of  it  felf :  Which  it  the  drop  and 
liquor  of  his  eternal,  great y  and  incomprehenfible  Majejite  of  himfelf,  hit  mercie  :  Which  ,  even  in  the 
midfl  of  Juliice  it  found  out  ,by  for  row  full  repentance  ,  and  reconciliation:  Not  in  that  it  is  necef- 
farie  with  God :  But  that  it  is  a  Medicine  applicable,  and  moji  healthfull  to  the  infirmities  of  that 
Marty  that  coveteth  to  be  healed,  releafed,  or  recovered  fi-om  his  foares.  This  is  it  ,  that  mufi  com- 
fort you.  For,  asjujlice  it  the  reward  of  fiu,fo  it  mercie  the  reward  of  repentance.  But  mer- 
cie it  the  Center  of  light :  and  Jufiice  to  be  caji  off,  andfhut  within  dark^effe.  Therefore  ,  be  not 
negligent. 

A.   This  whoredom,  how  is  it  committed,  or  of  whom  ? 

J  teach  the Where  thy  habitation  was,  errour  rained,  God  called  thee  fi-om  it :  and  de- 
livered thee  by  ynany,  but  unknown  wayes :  means  not  to  be  uttered  by  man.  Thefe  places  alfo  are  ■ 
fhut  up  from  the  favour  of  God.  For  their  obedience  it  eounterfeitedyand  their  prayers,out-cries. 
Therefore  hath  the  Lord  opened  him  unto  you  that  invented  the  vanitie  :  that  you  might  be  partaken 
of  his  kttowledgey  and  Secret  judgements  of  the  wick^ed.  Here  alfo  you  entred,and  are  newly  defiled: 
For  the  Devil  entred  in  y  and  found  him  wakjng  :  And  lo,  he  entred  yet ,  and  he  was  not  afleep. 
But  he  was  happie,  being  kf^dled  with  defire  of  Gody  elfe  had  the  judgement  of  hit  bodie  for  this 
World  been  fulfilled.  Wickedneffe  followeth  him  :  and  the  fpirit s  of  evilcounfel  are  at  hand.  Ton 
jhall  feel  the  forrow  thereof  ,  and  your  family  fhall  be  dtfcomforted.  But  pray  unto  Gody  that 
it  fain  not  out,  that  Sathan  goeth  about  :  Neither  that  it  come  to  paffe,  which  he  hath  power  to  ex- 
ecute. For,  this  token  fignifieth  your  miferies ,  and  it  it  a  fign  of  that  ,  which  it  given  to  exe- 
cution* 

I  have  faid. 

The  peace  of  God  be  rejlored  unto  you. 

E.  K.  Here 


(^  true  Relation  ofiy.  Dee  his  ABions  mth  fpirits,  (3cc»       4p 
E.K.  Here  is  the  man  again. 

.,;.,.  Two  vpords  and  1  have  done.  Nothing  it  -plainer  than  that  which  is  fpokjn  :  Nothing 
certainer  than  that  which  is  appointed.  Be  you  penitent,  that  God  may  be  merciful.  This  is  all 
J  have  to  fay.  IF  a fl?  your  fehes,  and  I  alfo  will  makj  yon  clean,  Kefijt  you  Satan  diligently, 
and  I  will  help  yon  mightily. 

A.  O  Lord  that  feal  to  the  Sword  and  rags  break  off. 

E-  K.  Now  he  is  gone. 

A. 

E-  K.  Now  he  is  here  again- 

.......  This  clond  is  a  feparationhetwixt  this,  yea  this  glorified  company  and  youm      Look^not 

for  any  li^ht,  whilejt  this  darkjtefs  if  prefent.  Behold^  my  mouth faltreth,  and  my  lips  are  Jlayed  : 
But  pray  yoiiy  andyonjhall  not  bereje&ed.  For  the  ftronger  yon  be,  the  mercifnller  is  God,  and 
the  weaker  it,  and  jhall  be,  your  adverfary.  Love  together;  Serve  God  together  :  Be  of  one 
heart  together.     Alwayes  preach  God.      I  am  tied. 

E.  K   He  is  gone. 

A,  Mifericordia  &  pax  Dei  fit  fiipcr  no?  nunc  &  fempet!. '  '  Jlmen. 


Friday^    Novemb.  15.  hora       vtane.  Lubek^. 

£  K.  The  cloud  appeareth,  and  openeth,  Co  that  the  Sword  may  be 
fccn. 

A.  O  Lord  deal  mercifully  with  US,  as  thy  children,  to  be  correfted  with  rod  or  whip, 
andnot  with  thy  enemies,  with  fword  to  cut  or  wound  us.  Let  not  Satan  force  thee  to  ju- 
ftice  more  mightily,  rhan  tliy  fatherly  goodneffe  can  incline  thee  to  fhew  mercy  upon  us. 

E,  K,  An  hand  comcih  and  nippech  ofFan  inch  of  the  top  of  the  Sword, 
andforae  of  the  rags  are  fallen  down,  fomc  hanging  on  the  hilcs  of  the 
Sword^  and  fome  are  thiuft  through  with  the  Sword.  Now  the  Sword  is 
fhut  up  again  in  the  Cloud, 

A.  Have  mercy  en  us,  O  Lord,  and  deal  with  us  as  thy  younglings  and  novices. 

E-  K.  Nowcomcin  an  elevcn,alllikc  Noblemen.  Oneof  them  hath 
a  regal  Cap,  and  a  Gown  faced  with  Sables-  The  Cap  is  like  a  Polonian 
Cap,  but  trimmed  up  with  rich  Sables-  Now  cometh  one  and  bringeth 
a  very  rich  Chair,  befet  with  precious  Stones :  Four  of  the  Company  fee 
down  this  Chair,  for  that  Principal  man.  He  that  brought  theChair 
went  away-  They  all  do  low  obedience  to  this  principal-  He  fitteth 
down,  and  putteth  his  Gown  over.  He  is  a  goodlier  man  than  the  Lord 
A  L.  The  4  pluck  a  thing  like  a  Canopy  over  the  Chair,  and  they  put  a 
round  Cusfliion  under  his  ftet.     Thii>  Principal  fpeaketh  as  followcth. 

Tluck^up  thy  heart  and  be  merry,  pine  not  thy  Soul  away  with   inward  gro'inings  ;  for  I 

vill  open  unto  thee  the  fecrets  of  Nature,  and  the  riches  of  the  iVorld,  and  wiihtl  give  thee  fuch 
direUion,thatJhall  deliver  thee  from  many  infirmities,  both  of  body  and  minde  :  Eafe  thee  of  thy 
tedious  labour,  and  fettle  thee  where  thoujh-ilt  have  comfort. 

A.  Thanks  be  given  unto  the  Higheit,  novv,  and  ever,  of  all  his  Creatures. 

JVhy  doji  thou  .  .  .  within  thy  thought :  Hiji  thou  not  needofCoun\el  ? 

A.   Yes,  God  knows ;  for  I  am  half  confounded. 

Thenfirji  d.  .  .  with  thyfelfto  refl  thee, for  this  Winter.     Secondly  open  thj  mindto  defire 

fuch  things  as  may  advance  thy  Credit,  and  enrich  thy  Family  :  Reap  unto  thee  many  friends^and 
lift  thee  up  to  honour  J  For  I  will  jiirupthe  minde s  of  Learned  men,  the  profoundefi  in  the  World 
that  they Jhallvifit  thee.  And  Iwill  difclofe  vntoyoufuch  things^  asfljallbewonderfull,  and  of 
exceeding  profit.  ^Moreover,  Iwill put  to  my  hands,and  help  your  proceedings,  that  the  World 
maytalk^ofyour  wifdom  hereafter,  "therefore  wander  not  farther  into  unknown  places,  conta~ 
gioHs,  the  very  feats  of  death  for  thee,  and  thy  children,  ajtd  fuch  as  are  thy  friends.  If  thou  en- 
quire of  me  where,  and  how.  Every  where  :  or  how  thou  wilt  thy  felf.  For  thoujhalt  f$rthwith 
become  rich,  and  thoujhalt  be  able  to  enrich  Kings,  and  to  help  fu.h  as  are  needy.  Wajl  thou  not 
btrn  to  ufe  the  comniodity  of  this  JForld  ?     l^ere  not  all  things  made  for  mans  vfe  ? 

A.  Willyou  give  me  leave  to  fpeak  ? 

••'...,  fFhat  canji  thoufpeak.hereimto  /     JFilt  thou  thank,  me  for  this  / 

H  A.  All 


I-  o        A  true  Relation  of  D^*.  Dee  his  ABions  mthfpirits.Scc. 


A.  All  thanks  be  unto  the  King  of  Gloiy,  &c. 

A.  Is  it  your  meaning  that  wc  (hall  Itay  here,  and  go  no  farther  v?ith  the  Lord  ^/i^rt 
Laskje  ? 

Te-s  in  the  Smnmer  ;  rohen  it  is  more  fair. 

A.  I  befeech  you.  Where  would  you,  that  we  fhould  make  our ....  this  Winter  ? 

H'here  you  tvUl.     Are  you  ^o  unwise  to  go  with  him  now.     Let  him  go  before,  and  provide 

fir  himfelf,  that  he  may  the  better povid  for  you.  7he  weather  will  be  hard,  and  the  travel  unfit 
for  children.      If  thou  covet  to  live  in  eafe^  heap  not  up  thy  wives  forrow. 

A.  I  defire  to  live  in  quiet,  that  my  (pirit  may  the  better  attend  to  the  fervice  of  God 

If'eil,  Tarry yoUi  and  wy  promife  fhall  be  quickjy  performed.     I  will  net  halt  witbyott. 

How  faj  jou  Sirs  ? 

[£.  K  He  fpcaketli  to  his  Company,vvho  make  curfics,and  fay  nothing.] 

A.   I  befeech  you  to  appoint  an  apt  place :  This  you  fee  is  no  fit  place. 

I  will Jiir  thee  tip  fftch  friends,  as  jhall  content   thee.     As  for  dwelling  places  thou  /halt 

belhw  them.        JFell,  you  are  contented. 

A.  Is  it  your  will,  that  in  this  Town  we  fiiould  part  from  the  Lord  Albert  Laskje  ? 

What  fhould  jou  do  elfe  ?  Are  yo»  mad  men?  Will  jou   run  headlong  into  danger? 

wilfully  ? 

,A.  I  befeech  you,  (hall  this  be  nothing  prejudicial  to  our  former  doings,  and  order  al- 
ready taken  and  decreed  for  our  going  together  ? 

What, isthis  contrary  to  reason?       Well  you  are  content. 

A.  As  the  will  of  the  Higheft  is,  fo  is  mine  and  none  other. 

Sirha,  doyoufee  this  fword  ?  I  will  be  a  furety  for  this  (^  J  warrant  thee  )  alft. 

four  brother  isclapped  vpinprifon.  How  liisyou  that  ?     lour  houfe-kfeper  Imean. 

A.  And  why  I  pray  you  ? 

For  that,  that  thou  mayeftbe  afhamedof. 

A.    What  is  that? 

Ihey  examtnhim  :   "they  fay.,  that  thonhafi  hid  divers  fecret  things.      As  for   tky  Book^s-^ 

thou  mayji  go  look^them  at  leafure.  It  may  be,  that  thy  kottfe  may  be  burnt  for  a  remembrance  of 
thee  too.  Well  tf  they  do,  fo  it  is  :  if  Hn,as  thou  wilt.  I  have  told  thee  my  phanfie,  and  given  thee 
wy  counfely  offered  thee  my  help,  and  de fired  to  do  thee  good  :        The  choice  is  thine. 

A.  O  Lord  the  Authorof  all  truth,  and  direftor  of  fuchaspuc  their  truft  in  thee,  1  nioft 
humbly  befeech  thee  to  confiderthefepremifes,  thus  to  me  propounded.  If  they  be  true, 
and  from  thee,  confirm  them;  If  they  Keillufions,  and  not  from  thee,  difprove  them.  For, 
hardly  in  my  judgement,  they  do  or  can  agree  with  our  former  precepts  and  order  taken  by 
thee, 

A  voice He  that  afcendetb  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill  ^  let  him  believe  :  For  until  he  come 

thither,  let  him  du  his  l.rbour. 

O  Lord,  I  doubc  of  rhcfe  th  ngs,  and  promifcsof  eafe,  wealth,  and  honour, 

A  voice J"dge  the  Truth,  by  the  laji  A^ion. 

O  LordjWhat  is  that  Aftion  ? 

A  voice Wenfdaies  Adion. 

This  Cloud  (^faid  the  voice  of  the  Lord  )  is  put  betwixt  us  and  you  '.  ff'bat  therefore  may  come 
between^  Now  judge  you. 

A.  I  fufpeft  the  whole  apparition  of  the  eleven  to  be  an  illufion.  O  Lord  confirm  ray 
judgement  or  difprove  it. 

A  voice The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  not  amongjlyou. 

A.  What  miferyare  we  then  in  ?  O  Lord,  Mercy,  Mercy. 

A  voice I  ifpnte  not  with  God,  where  whoredom  is  great. 

A.   O  Lord,  This  whoredom  we  underftand  not. 

A  voice Fray  daily,  with  repentance,  that  this  cloud  may  be  takjn  away,  and  this  fword 

diminijhed.  For  the  Seal  cannot  be  brokfn,  until  Satan  have  done  his  uttermoji  ;  yea  the  utter- 
moji  of  his  malice.  For  it  n  granted  him  and  he  mujl  firikf.  But  pray  you  unto  God  ,  that  the 
fword  may  bemadejhorter,  or  pluck}  out  of  the  hilt,  that  in  firikjng  he  want  power.  For  ytmr  fin 
it  abominable,  and  a  fevenfold  offence  in  the  fight  of  the  Lord. 

A.  What  this  whoredom  is  (  God  knoweth  )  we  underftandnot  perfcftly.  If  the  Spirit 
of  God  be  not  with  us,  how  can  our  prayers  be  acceptable  ? 

A  voice Thui  faith  the  Lord,  Turn  unto  me  and  be  forry  for  your  fins  y  and  let  my  An- 
gels be  witneffe  thereof.  For  I  [wear  by  my  [elf,  that  myjujiice  Jhall  hang  over  you  :  And  when 
J  pun  ip  you  next,  I  will  raze  you  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  Therefcrej  Vow  your  felves  unto 
tne  ,  and  mal{e  your  veffels  clean  ■■,  for  your  habitations  in  my  fight  are  nothing  :  neither 
is  the  fubjiance  whereof  I  framed  you  acceptable  .  1  am  the  Spirit  of  Truth  and 
VnderfiandiHg,  and  will  net  be  dafijt  in  pieces  with  worldlings;  Neither  vfe  I  to  dwell  in  defiled 
places.  For  my  Sanduary  is  holy,  and  my  Gates  are  without  fpot.  And  with  me  there  dwelleth  no 
unrighteoufneffe. 

A.    Lord 


(iAirm  Relation  of  D^,  Dee  hii  ABions  mthfpirits,  &c.        ^  i 


A.  Lord, is  ic  thy  vvil!   we  fhall  go  with  Albert  Lashje  to  Lafco  ? 

A  voycc.  T''e  Lordfaifth,  JFhat  I  hive  fi'id,  ii  true.  jyho  rekihjth  me,  faying  my  words  are 
tatrue  ?  The  corredion  of  hint  that  reigneth  is  mightie  j  vh)  hath  numbred  it  ?  But  to  his  de" 
flruHiof!,     Be  you  koly-,  that  my  hand  may  be  weak^. 

A.  O  Lord,  the  fear  of  thy  punifhment  aftonieth  my  heart :  and  uncertainry  of  it  in  time 
and  place,  doth  alio  encreafeniy  grief,  &c. 

A  voyce.  The  fool  faith  in  bis  heart :  Oh,  how  great  is  thy  punijfmient  over  me.  Teach  me  the 
place  of  thy  correclion  :  And  where  thou  wilt  chajiife  me.  Who  is  he  that  defireth  to  meet  God  his 
vengeance,  or  the  piwijhment  of  him  that  confoundeth  the  damned  ?  Mal^e  your  hearts  clean,and 
vipe  the  fin  from  amongji  you  :  And  defire  to  be  forgiven,  for  wiferable  are  they  that  meet  with  ven- 
geance, or  that  kttow  the  place  where  ll.<e  takfth  up  her  Harbour. 

A.  Gloria  ,  Honor  ,  Laus  &  gratiarum  aftio  perenuis  (it  Deo  noflro  Omnipotenti  :  Nobis  ve- 
roaDeoPatre,  propter  Jefum  Chriftumin  Spiritii  Saiifto  ,  fit  Mifericordia,  Pax  &:  Confolatio 
in  via  virtutis  &  veritatis.  Amen. 


Monday,  iNTsT/fwf'.iS.  Hora^.  Mane.  Lubek, 

E.  K.  There  appeareth  the  Cloud  ,  wherein  the  fword  remaincth  en- 
clofcd- 

A.  O  Lord,  be  niercifuU  unto  us ,  and  rigoroufly  execute  not  thy  Juftice  upon  us,  thy 
weaklings:  Nor  fufFer  Satan  to  Triumph  ,  where  thy  glory  is  expefted,8ic.  Converte  nos 
J)euf  falutaris  nojier,  &  averte  iram  tuani  a  nobis, &c. 

£.  K-  NowcomechoneiaawhiceCoat,nocperfedIy  to  befecn,  but  as 
if  he  were  feen  through  a  CiprefTc  ,•  and  faid  as  followeth. 

f^'ho  is  he  that  leadetk  out  the  Lion  to  prey  ?  or  who  is  he  that  lifteth  up  the  feet  of  the  young 

enes  to  devour  ?  Whofeedeth  the  fmell of  the  roaring  Bear ,  or  hath  taught  him  to  remember  the 
place  of  his  recreation  ?  Hath  he  alfo  taught  the  fields^  to  put  forth  their  voices  :  and  the  mighty 
trees  to  floiirifh  in  pride  ?  Are  not  the  Hills  glad  when  they  bring  forth  Corn  ?  When  the  Valleys 
rejoice  with  threefold  waters.       The  beafts  of  the  itilderneffe  have  they  not  kjiown  Caves  :  and  unto 

fuch  as  are  made  tame,  it  there  not  a underjtanding  ?        For,  who  it  he  that  teacheth  them,  to 

makjfubjeB  themfelves,  which  are  ravening,  or  to  bridle  fuch  as  are  of  their  frowardneffe  ?  'Even 
he  it  if  ,  that  look^eth  down  from  Heaven,  and  beholdeth  the. earth  ,  and  meafureth  with  his  feety 
f'^yifgy 

It  it  done. 

ff^ich  entretb  alfo  into  the  houfes  of  men,  and  lifteneth  to  that  which  they  call  wonders.  Which 
tpenetb  the  gates  of  hit  knowledge  with  kit  own  finger  ;  And  which  fayeth  unto  you  :  How  are  ye 
hecomewife  ?  Or  from  whence  is  your  miderlianding,  are  your  hearts  become  Caves  to  fend  out  Thun- 
ders ?  Or  why  are  your  ffirits  thus  vexed  with  holineffe  ?  Are  you  not  a  liiff-necl{ed  people,  and  fuch 
as  are  defpifed  .<'  Are  you  not  poor,and  therefore  hated.  Since,  therefor e,you  are  become  Bajiards, 
who  teacheth  your  lips  to  fpeak,  of  my  Church?  Or  hath  taught  yon  to  urge  me  with  mine  own 
fpirit  / 

Behold,  t  am  mighty, 

Becaufe  I  am  the  joy  of  the  faithfulU  For  I  am  called  the  Temple  of  the  Holy  ones,and  the  beauty 
cf  Ifrael .  Ths  fpirit  of  man  crieth  out,  and  pierceth  into  the  Lord  ,  .w  the  fw'ftnejfe  of  an  Arrow : 
And  he  heard  them.  Therefore,  thus  doth  the  winde  o/Caboa  open  her  mouth  ,  and  fweareth  by 
the  ]i^\>-dv  Pillar  that  jtandeth  in  the  Temple  of  Reconciliation,  and  it  Thunder eth,  and  is  faid  ^ 

Be  it  done. 

And  behold,  the  doors  open,  and  the  Holy  Altar  it  covered.     The  beafis  with  many  feet  hriitS,  up 
lurnt- offerings :  And  there  it  a  facrifice  that  afcendeth  up,  and  it  is  a  mighty  winde.,  fuch  as  hath 
not  beenfince  the  beginning  of  dajes.         Open  your  ears  therefore,  and  prepare  your  felves  to  hear : 
For  thit......  it  mighty,  for  it  it  of  peacei        My  Jujiice  {faith  the  Lord)  is  fealed  ,  and  you  have 

finned  mightily  :  My  arm  it  jir etched  forth,  and  I  mufi  be  magnified :  For  vengeance  is  gone 
forth,  and  is  appeared  already.  But  who  it  he  tha  t  refijieth  the  venome  of  the  earth,  or  indrucfetb 
man  to  avoid  theVarts  of  po^fon  ?  He  faith  unto  you.  Thus  it  is,  becaufe  I  have  fanclified  you, 
and  h-^ve  made  you  holy  to  the  earth:  Therefore  will  I  help  you  :  But  not  as  you  defire  :  For  your 
prayers  and  unrighteous  lifejhall  becoine  bands  of  yarn.  And  I  will  ntak.e  a  Contention  betwixt  Sa^ 
than  and  yon.  If  therefore  you  labour  hard,and  open  fervent  mindes,fu  b  .is  are  not  of  the  world j 
atid-can  binde  this  fword  and  cloud  of  vengeance  faji  from  amonz^ji  you :  Be  it  fo  unto  you,  for  it  is 
your  own  right eoufnejfe.       For  Sathan  hath  reviled,  and  hath  f aid  , 

That  Jhalt  thou  fee, 
^Butfo  long  as  they  are  Holy,  and  become  right eoufieffc,  they  are  become  fafe  :  hut  when  thy  fall i 
Sat0»  entretb  in.        For  the  power  of  righteoufmffe  is  become  a.  Conquerour  3  ifjt  figkt  mightily. 
And  Satan  flidll be  confomded  by  a  righteous  j udgemcnt. 

H   2  For 


^z     A  true  "{{elation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mthfpirits,  ^cc. 

For  I  have  decreed  it :  and  by  my  felf  I  [wear  it 


Note. 


tor  1  nave  aciTc<;u' '<■  •  •^••■•■^"j '"J  i^-j  *  j" —  --• 
I  Will  he  a  righxem  Judge  betwixt  you.       Therefore,  take  heed  you  fin  not  ,  mr  go  into  death  : 
For  zreat  n  the  fall  of  vengeance.       Be  not  therefore  defiled  with  the  filthmefe  of  the  wicked  : 
Neither  delight  tn  fuch  a,  counterfeit  truth.        For  I  am  one  fire  thatjudgeth  all  things.       And  I 
delight  in  people  that  are  joy  full  with  one  Banket.     For  thofe  that  fill  their  bellies   at  the  houfes  of 

ihangers  :  Become  enemies  to  me. 

For  I  have  faidy 
My  fptrit  is  holy,  and  wy  annointed  righteous.  Let  the  earth  rife  up  ,  and  continue  in  her  wic- 
kedneke-  Tea,  let  them  fay y  we  have  found  the  anointed :  But  my  continuance  is  truth,  and  they  are 
become  liars.  For  my  fpirit  worKethy  and  behold,  there  are  wonders  in  the  fight  of  men.  And 
wheresoever  I  dwell, fuch  is  my  power.  Be  therefore  of  One  houfe,that you  may  eat  together:Leafi 
you  banket  too  much  ,  and  fo  become  deceivers.  I  am  one,  and  am  kpown  by  One  :  And  unto  One, 
mi^h  One  I  am  married  mto.  {And  I  am  merctfulO  Whofoever  abtdeth  not  therein,  is  an  Adul^  . 
terer.       Avoid  yoft  dark^effe,  for  righteoufneffe  is  prefent  ,  and  wy  f^irit  entreth.       Bleg.d  art  ■ 

fuch  as  believe.  Amen. 

Even  to  the  ,  Amen. 

5-  K.  He  is  gone-   There  appcare  fome  bands  linked  together,  as  Chaincs 
about  the  Cloud. 

A.  Welcome  be  thefe  bands. 

£.K.  He  is  here  again  J andfaith eth. 

Why  areyou  become  dull?  Why  are  you  yet  ignorant  ?       Seefi  thou  thefe [Hepoint- 

cth,and  fpeaketh  to  E.  K.] 

f.  iC.  Uee  them,  I  thank  God. 

...thefe  bonds  are  your  own  righteoufnege  :  And  m  they  appear  before  the  Lord,  fo  {hall  they 
hinde  vengeance  together  :  But  if  you  become  weakyou  fall.  But  pray,  that  you  fall  not  :  For  they  ' 
are  the  dayes  offorrow.  the  fpirit  of  God  is  twofold  ;  prefent  Jah  agian,  and  prefent  Nah  gaf- 
fapalan.  therefore  take  heed.  For,  in  the  firji,  you  are  bleffed :  and  it  may  return.  But  he 
that  is  filM  with  the  fecond,  (hall  be  drunken  for  ever.  the  firji  it  power  prefent ,  and  a  comfort 
inmeafurable,  glorifying,  and  jhengthning  all  things  that  are  agreeable  to  it :  But  when  they  difer, 
it  returneth.  the  other  is  the  fpirit  of  the  firji,  and  the  fecond  ,  Almighty  ,  and  everlajiing  ,  w«- 
meafurable  ,  and  inexplicable:  drowning  the  will  of  man,  that  becometh  jirongin  the  fountain  of 
gladneffe  and  underlianding :  true  wifdont  her  felf,  and  not  returning.  Fray,  therefore  ,  that  you 
may  be  per  fed  :  and  that  you  may  be  feafoned  :  For  it  is  a  fait  that  faveureth  to  the  end, 

the  peace  of  God  be  amongji you. 

E.  JC-   Hecaft  off  his  Cloudy  Lawn,  and  went  away.  Hefcemedtobe 

Raphael* 

ts..  Yet  we  befeech  you  more  exprefly,  and  particularly  to  deal  with  \\?,&4. 

It  isfaid It  is  written It  is  true. 

Ceafe. 
A.  Gloria,  LauSj  Honour,  Triumphus  &  Jubilatio  fit  Deo  noftro  oranipotenti ;  Nunc  &: 
femper.  Amen. 


\Vednc[d^y,Novemh.2o.  Manehor.iil,  Lubek,. 

b..  As  thou  haft  of  thy  mercies  CO  Lord)  given  us  fome  (hew  of  thy  favour  bent  toward 
us :  foarewc  defirous  to  underftandhow  our  Letters  have  wrought  upon  our  friend  his  heart 
to  joyn  with  us  to  call  for  thy  mercies,  pardon  and  help  :  for  if  they  have.  Then  do  we  hope, 
our  bands  (of  acceptable  life)  whereby  tobinde  vengeance  prepared  and  intended  againft  us» 
fliall  wax  more  and  ftronger  :  by  thy  great  mercy  and  help  to  thy  well-pleafing  in  thy  fcrvice 
hence  forward. 

£.  K.  The  Cloud  and  bonds  appear :  But  the  bands  appear  fewer.  . 

A.  O  Lord,  is  our  ftate  fince  yefterday  become  weaker  with  thee  ?  And  (hall  it  fo  narrowly 
be  exafted  ?  Thy  will  be  done,  who  art  holy,  jufl,  and  moft  wife,  O  God. 

E.K.  The  bonds  about  the  Cloud,  now  areonely  twO;  which  before 
were  fix,  or  feven.  The  bonds  feem  of  a  fmoky  afliy  collour  ,  fpirally  going 
about  the  Cloud. 

At  length  a        Judgement  is  the  end  of  Juftice  :  difiributing  and  delivering  alfo  to  every  thing,  feeny  heard, 

vcyce.  or  determined  to  hit  proper  end  uprightly.        Are  you  able  to  deny  this  i^ 

A.  The  end  of  our  aftions ,  words ,  and  thoughts  may  feem  twofold  :  One  of  us  in- 
tended ,  and  ment  to  be  good  :  The  other  not  depending  upon  our  weening  ,  but  accord- 
ing to  exaft  vvifdom,  what  istheend  of  the  famejliere  deemed  the  proper  end,  if  1  undcr- 
ftaud  right. 

A  voycc. 


<a^  true  Relation  of  I>.  Dee  his  ABions  with  fpirits,  dec.       ^  5 


A  voyce.  Lo,  yudgement  is  the  end  of  Juliice  in  things  that  are  handled  uprightly :  whereof  you 
finde  the  Omnipotencie  and  Truth  of  him  that  pidgeth  Omnipotently :  IVhich  beholding  your  Combat ^ 
hath  girded himfelf  together^and  beholdeth  the  Lijis,  and  he  judgeth  uf  rightly :  For^  he  hath  fworn  it- 
Arm  not  your  felves  therefore  as  weakjings  :  But  provide  as  mightie  and  couragious  Souldiers,  for  your 
cwn  defence.  I  am  without  corruption  (faith  the  Lord)  and  lean  not  with  the  windes  of 
Bafannah. 

A.  O  Lord,  give  me  leave  to  rcqueft  thee,  &c. 

A  voyce.  But  I  am  juft,  and  judgement  her  felf.  Entemot  therefore  into  my  holy  places  :  If ei* 
ther  kjteel  down  before  my  fanSuaries ;  faying,  the  Lord  hath  Chofen  us  ,  He  livethy  and  it  is  true 
forever.  For  I  have  fazd.  It  may  be  undetermined.  I  will  alfa- fee,  whether  you  be  ftrong  in- 
wardly, or  privily  rotten*  For  with  the  world  your  weakjieffe  is  great.  JVhofoever  overcometh 
jhall  rejoyce.  But  I  will  be  a  God  in  my  Covenant  and  will  hold  on  my  promife  :  Fight  therefore 
as  it  becometh  you,  and  caji  off  the  world.  Makf  fiep  fubjeif ,  and  flr angle  your  Adverfary^ 
for  unto  fuch  belongetb  the  entrance  into  my  Chambers,  and  the  ufe  of  my  will,  as  the  Horn  of  my 
glorie.  For  it  is  written,  light  dwelleth  not  in  darkjteffe  :  Neither  hath  darkjteffe  comprehended, 
any  light :  For  darkjtejfe  is  the  Cave  of  err  our,  and  the  reward  of  finners.  Thus  fay  etb  he,  which 
beholdeth  your  forrows :  And  it  is  a  fight  for  -many  daies, which  appeareth  neither  in  the  one,  nor  in 
the  other  :  nor  giveth  he  anfwer  untill  the  end. 

B-  /^«  There  is  one  come  in  like  a  Ghoft,  and  hctaketh  all  the  hangings 
away,  which  beautified  the  place  like  to  Curtains-  Now  all  the  fides  of 
the  ftone  are  darkifh  jand  the  Cloud  ftandeth  in  the  very  middle  thereof^ 
Now  the  bands  feem  brighter  then becaufe  the  place  is  fo  darkifh, 

A.  O  Lord,  many  </<zi«  Combat  is  affigiied  us.  And  forafmuch  as  Militia  eji  vita  hominis  fu- 
per  Terr  am,  we  are  now  in  a  great  uncertainty  of  our  Combat  ending. 

£.  K'  There  ftandeth  the  number  of  40*  upon  a  great  Labell ,  and  no- 
thing  clfe* 

A.  This  40.  (  O  Lord)  what  bctokencth  it  ,  daycs  ,  weeks  ,  or  years  >  Well :  Whatfo- 
ever  it  be,  Blefled  be  the  name  of  the  Higheft.       Our  God,  King,  and  Father.  ' 

E.  K. 

A. 

E-  K-  Now  is  one  come  in  very  brave,  like  a  Preacher ;  I  take  him  to  be 
an  evil  one. 

A,  Benediftus  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini.  Yhis  Preach- 

E.  K.  He  faith  nothing  5  Not  fo  much  as,  Amen.  wSy«h." 

Are  you  fo  foolifh  to  thinks  that  the  power  of  God  will  defcend  into  fo  bafe  a  place  ? 

£•  K-  The  power  of  God  defccnding,  deicendcth  to  beautifie  the  place. 
And  whatfoeverhebcautificchjhe  doth  it  mercifully :  And  ^o  through  his 
mercy  he  defcendcth  among  us,that  put  our  truft  in  his  mercies- 

It  is  true  :  But,  unto  thofe  that  are  righteous. 

A.  Chrift  his  coming  hath  been  to  fave  finners.  His  converfation  was  among  finners, 
naltjlame,  blinde,  anddifeafed.  Solikewife  :  Now  our  fi-ailty  ,  or  impurity  will  not  c%-^ 
elude  his  prefcnce,  or  the  Miniftcry  of  his  faithful!  Angels, 

What,  in  this  bafe  manner? 

A.  Doyoumiflikethemanner? 

Can  any  that  hath  any  drop  ofwifdom  likf  it  ? 

A.  Are  you  wife?  :\,y.'a  :  r ,.  • 

*... .»  Or  elfe  I  could  not  fee  thy  imptrfeHioas. 

A.  Which  be  they  ?  Accufeme. 

^k^t  greater  imperfedion,  then  to  imagine  much  more  believe,  that  the  Angels  of  God,  Willi- 

or  may  defcend  into  fo  filthie  a  place,  as  this  corruptible  fione  is  ?  Confidering  the  clear neffe,  and  big- 
neffe  of  the  aire,  or  the  places  that  are  prepared  in  mans  bodies  for  fuch  entrances. 

A.  Who  caufcth  thee  to  come  here  ? 

Thy  folly. 

A.  Art  thou  good, or  bad? 

I  am  good,  or  elfe  I  could  not  feethebad. 

A.  Ergo,  thou  art  a  lyar,  for  thou  fayd'ft,  No  good  Angel,  ipould,  or  might  come  here  intof 
tnis  ftone. 

A.  Thus  will  God  be  glorified  againft  wicked  Satan,  and  his  Minifters.       His  fetch  was  ve- 


54        ^  true^elation  o/*D^  Dee  his  ABions  whfprits,  &c. 


jy  Cubtile  :  As,  To  bring  in  doubt  all  the  Anions  performed  in  this  ftone.       What  canft  thou 
yniwer  ? 

€•  K.  He  fayeth  nothing  •  Neither  can  he  fay  any  thing-  He  ftemeth  to  be 
a  very  foolifli  Devil, 

A.  Mendaceni  oportct  efle  memorem.    Now  be  packing  henee. 

I  will  abide  here. 

A.  Where  God  will  permit  thee,  there  mayeftthou  be :  But  we  will  (as  now)  ccafc  :  And 
we  thank  God  highly  of  this  comfort  and  viftory  :  We  befeech  him  ,  that  we  may  as  profper- 
oufly  overcome  all  other  Diabolical  aflaults  or  fophiftical  ,  or  untrue  perfwafions :  and  all  his 
Tenipcacions.     Amen. 

Glory,  Honour,  power,  and  praife  be  to  our  Almighty  and  living  God  ,  the  Lord  of 
HoltSj  Jehovak^nsw  and  ever.       Amen. 


Saturday, A^oi/fwt.  23.     kMeridiehora  i\.  Lubek. 

E.  K.   Here  appeareth  the  fame  bad  one,  fitting,  who  laft  appeared-    The 
Cloud  with  the  1  word  appeareth  at  laft :  with  two  wreaths  on  one  fidci  and 
two  on  the  other, Ipirally-      This  Creature taketh  the  cloudy  pillar,  and 
throweth  ic  from  him  divers  times- 
He  fayeth.   Call  ,ti  long  m  thou  wilt,  J  will  keep  thee  for  feeing  any  more  fights  here. 
A.  Or  Lord,   attend  unto  thy  glory  :  Attend  imto  thy  honour,  regard  the  arrogancy  of  this 
Luciferine  brag  againft  thy  younglings  expreffed. 
A,   And  of  theLord,  ^/i.  Ldfi^?f,  &c. 
..... .  Hejhallcome  to  dejiru&ion,  at  thou  and  thine  to  tniferable  leggery :  Becaufehe  hathconfeated 

to  them  that  areMinijiers  of  iniquitj,fpirits  of  faljjjood. 

E.  K.    He  looketh  on  a  bare  book,  when  he  faith  thus- 

.",.  ,.^he  power  of  God  entreth'into  the  Soul  of  man,  and  doth  vifit  the  Cbamhers  of  his  under^ 
landing  :  openeth  his  will  with  p^wer.  The  fpirits  of  darkneffe  are  ready  for  every  place  ,  and. 
can  deceive,  faying,  This  is  of  God.  Vnto  the fe  you  have  lijiened  :  and  have  fworn  it  at  a  Covenant  . 
between  God  and  yov^  But  I  am  come  from  Goi :  and  am  entred  indeed ,  and  will  mak^e you  hun- 
gry in  your  own  foolifhneffe,  that  you  viay  become  wife.  None  hath  entred  here  with  power  but  I. 
And  I  will  tarry  here.  And  I  will  be  a  wall  betwixt  you  ,  and  your  imaginations  :  and  betwixt 
thofe  that  have  tempted  you ,  and  your  weakjtejfe.       for  thou  haji  called  upon  God  :  and  be  hath 

heard  thee,  and  I  am  he  that  fayeth  fo  unto  thee.       Laws  of  falvation  are  ready,follow  them. 

The  way  into  dark^neffe  is  wideband  eafie  ,^an^  where  light  is,  it  encreafeth  joy.    Be  thott  therefore 
warned  by  we. 

Nay,  I  have  fa  id. 

A.  Thou  haft  faid  here.  That  thou  art  God,  is  that  true?       For  thou  haft  faid.  Thou  haf 
called  upon  God,  and  he  hath  hard  thee  :  And  I  am  he  ,  that  fayeth  fo  unto  thee. 

I  fee  thee  :  And  thy  wifdom  is  nothing  :  Mal{e  of  me  what  thettcanji  ,  I  am  the  meffager  o^ 

God. 

Avoid  darkjieffe,  avoid  darkjteffe,  avoid  darkjteffe. 

E.  K.  He  plucketh  down  violently  (in  the  ftone)  the  Clouds,  and  all  hi 
cometh  light  in  the  ftone- 

Ly  here  with  thy  fellofvs.        Thofe  that  are  of  wifdom,  let  them  xnderfiand. 

A.    O  Sapientiapatris  2terni,illuminamentes  noftras,  ut  tibi  ferviamus  in  fanftitate,  &  Ju- 
ftitia  toto  vitae  noftrx  tempore.        Amen. 

Carmathar,  a  Knight  of  theKhodes,  was  thirteen  years  deceived  with  one  that  appeared 

(iW  he  thought)  in  glone  &  wifdom  in  the  image  of  Chrifi.  Antony  was  begttiled  in  divers  wayes. 
The  Prophets  &  Apojiles  have  doubted  in  many  things;  But  becattfe  they  faithfully  believed  they  were 
not  rejected.  Their  hope  became  fruitfHll,and  they  bleffed  with  underjianding  from  above. If  fo  be  alfo, 
y,u  repent,  and  be  forry  in  that  you  have  yielded  unto  the  injiruments  of  wick^edneffe :  a  nd  follow  on, 
as  they  your  fathers  have  done  ,youjhall  alfo  become  wife ;  But  I  fay  unto  you,  7kat  which  you  have 
confented  unto  is  air.iffc  ,  and  falfe,worfe  then  errour  it  felf.  For,  where  have  you  tailed  anie  fruit 
cutofthafDocirine.  How  poor  is  the  power, that  hath  been  longtold  of  inyo^t.  Ton  have  for-' 
gttten  your  own  knowledge,  and  are  become  of  feers,  blitide  :  fuch  as  grope  their  way.  Such  end,fuch 
beginning.  For  the  end  hangeth  from  the  beginning  :  and  is  become  a  means  in  it  felf ,  to  bring  all 
tilings  to  paffe.  But  neither  the  end  nor  beginning  of  fuch  things  as  you  have  handled  hath  been  per- 
fed,  or  probable  :  But  a  deceit,  comprehending  the  image  of  falpjood :  Tea,  much  more  the  traps  and-' 
fnares  into  wickedneffe ;  which  deferveth  dejiruUion  eternally. 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  Jciicns  mth  fpirits,  5c  c.         55 


If  tkU  may  advi[e  yoUyB^  it  fo.  If  thefe  examples  and  probable  arguments  be  found  ^  Then 
neceffarilyyou  ovght  of  dtitie  to  be  counfelled  by  me  :  Bat  1  have  opened  my  mouth  and  told  you.  Be 
itunto  you^  according  to  your  difpoftion. 

A.  Be  it  unto  us  according  to  the  mercies  and  loving  kindne/Te  of  the  Highert  ;  into  vvhofe 
hands  we  commit  ourfelves,  all  our  doings,  and  intents. 

"tliat  is  well faid  .  .  .  Godbewithym. 

E.  K.  He  is  gone,  and  in  the  place  where  he  ftood  the  likenefle  of  a  littU 
Circle,  as  if  a  print  were  made  with  a  Thimblc-briin- 

A.  Soli  Deo,  Honor  omnis.  Si  Gloria.     Amen. 


Monday  2^. Novemb.    Mane^  S  i     Lvh\. 

E'K.  Here appcarechltraight  way,  (atche  firil  looking )  the  famefel-    E.r^. 
low  that  laft  fpake,  and  Jcfc  the  print  of  the  little  Circle  behind  him.  1/" 

A.  Orabamdiu  ad  Deum)  ut  Arbiter  cfTet  inter  iftos.     A  ....  num  ....  lum  confugimus  in 
tempore  necefsitatis,  &c.       A  te  C  O  Deus  )  folo  pendemus,  &s. 
A.  Sedebamus  quafi  in  triangulo,  &  fe  convertebat  verfus  y<  L. 

Jhou,Oma»,awal{e,lhakeoffforgetflneffe:  Lift  mt  up  thy  felf  fo  much;  But  clofe  up 

thine  eares  againji  thefe  deluded  deluders,  which  carry  thee  headhng  into  folly:,  and  transform  thee 
to  ajhadovr :    By  whofe  counfel  thou  art  become  difhmouredy  and  by  -whom  thou  (bale  become   a  fpot 
in  the  Booi{_of  Fame^,    Call   to  remembrance  the  Hijhries  of  the  whole  Worlds  Political  andEc- 
cleftajiical.    Inguire  of  the  Learned  that  have  fettled  their  judgements  in  the  Book^of  god.     Open 
thine eyesy  and  behold,  if  any  of  the  Prophets  or  forefathers   (  men  grounded  in  wifd^m   and  diep 
intderjianding)  have  yielded  themfehes  to  thit  unrighteoufneffe^  belieting  lyars  ;  confenting  to  un- 
truths, and  lalily  dijhonouring  the  Name  of  God.       Then  call  to  minde  thine  own  ejlate^  thf  fiour- 
ijhingof  thy  youth ,  and  poffibil'ties,  wherein  thou  may'f  he  made  perfect.     yf'Vich  if  thou  truely  ij. 
Then  banilh  this  diflionour  to  God  and  his  Angles,  lijien  mt  to  thefe  S  ......  erfity  :    For  the  Syrenes 

are  awak^e,and  their  fong  isto  deftruiiion.  I  am  fent  from  God,  as  a  Meffenger  to  call  thee 
home;  for  thou  difhonourefi  God  mightily.  Behold  thm  fljalt  be  made  contemptible,  and  iecome  a 
laughing-ihc\.  Thy  honour  ,lhall  be  defaced,  and  thy  pojlerity  fpotted  with  ignominie.  More-^ 
over,  fuch  as  are  thy  friends  (hall fhak^e  their  heads ,  faymg,  H'hat  wife  man  hath  thus  been  over- 
some  ?  What  is  he  that  is  become  foolifh  t  Thou  maj'i  defire  it,  and  confent,  as  before  ;  But  I  am 
a  fiumbling  blocks  betwixt y)u,^ndw\\[  dwell  in  j// Elements  for  your  purpofes. 

E-  K-  Heholdcth  up  hii  hands  towards  ^  and  laith,  «,  Nay  I  have 
told  him  truth-  ....,, 

E  A..  /:iehath  now  gotten  him  a  Chair,  and  littctti  down-  lunged,  h= 

A.  If  it  be  truth,  then  it  is  a  token  that  God  is  Very  merciful  unto  us  ;  and  that  we  are  DecUna,  ama- 
In  his  favour  highly,  to   give  us  this  warning  to  avoid   evil.      Now  refteth  the  other  part, /o  6'  f "«  *o- 
How  we  fhall  attain  to  good,  and  wifdom,  from  God  ;  fuch   as  by  the  true  and  perfeft  ufe  of"*™'  ^'fato 
his  creatures,  we  might  do  him  fome  acceptable  fervice  ,    with   true  obedience  and   humi- 
lity, &c. 

E.  K-  Onecomethtohim,and  faith Ht  go:th  about  to  takeyoaa 

lyar. 

E.  iL'  Hcgoethaway,  and  Cometh  again, 

E-  K-  This  man  which  thus  came  and  went  awavj  and  comcth  again, 
is  all  in  white-,  he  hath  a  filyer  Crown  on  his  head-  he  fpeaketh  as  fol- 
ioweth  •••. 

T>e»y  that  you  have  done,  Confejfe  it  to  be  falfe^  Cry yiu  have  offended.  And  let  the  An- 
gels of  God  feeyou  do  Jo,  (  that  they  may  carry  up  your  prayers^  fo  Jhall  you  become  righteous  ; 
But  why  doji  thouwrite  words  of  contempt  againji  M  1  For  One  in  our  number  is  All-,  And  we 
are ,  all.  One.  Believe  us  ;  for  of  our  felves  we  have  no  power  to  infrnrt  you,  but  to  deliver  you  the 
Commandment  of  God.  Rent  your  cloaths,  plucky  thofe  blafphemous  bookj  in  pieces  ;  And  fall  down 
before  the  Lord  :  for  he  it  is,  that  is  Wifdom.       I  have  done  for  this  tune. 

E-K-    He  is  gone. 

A.  QlLis  eft  difcretor  Spirititum  ? 

E.  K-  Now  he  cometh  in  again  and  fpeaketh. 

Oh, you  are  a  Learned  man Truth  in  the  fecond  :   He  it  is  that  difcreetly  jv.dgeth  all 

things.      If  his  difcretion  be  given  to  you,  thanks  God. 

A.  mi 


5  ^      A  true  "[(elation  of  D^  Dee  h'ts  JBionsmthffirits^dic. 


A.  IIU  ergoConmiittemus  hanccaufara;  abillohoc  donum  petcntes  &:  expeftantes.   Nos 
interim  pic  in  Chiiito  vivcre  intendimus. 

E.  K.  He  is  become  a  great  pillar  of  Chryftal  higher  than  a  Steeple.    He 
afcendeth  upward  in  clouds,  and  the  little  circle  remaineth- 

A.  Gloria,  laiis,  honor,  &  sratiarumaftio  fit  Deo  noftro  oranipotenti  Trino  8i  iini,  nunc, 
&  in  fecula  feciilorum.     Annn. 


T'uefday  Decembris  lo.  After  Diner,  we  removed  from  Lubek^y  and  the  Lord  Alb.  Laskjf 
went  by  Coach  to  Lord  fhriliopher,  Duke  o( L^^iecl^elburgh. 
Thiirfdaj  night  we  lay  at  JFifynar.  1 1.   Vecemb.  vel  I2. 

Saturday  morning  we  came  to  Rojhch.     14.  Decembris. 


Monday  Vecemh.  16.        M'tne  hor^  lO  \.        Rojloch. 

E-  K-  He  is  here,  that  laid,  he  would  dwell  in  omnihus  Elementis^  Sec- 

A. 

, I  came  from  the  fountain  of  light,  -where  is  no  errour  nor  darkneffeiand  have  Powery   (  be~ 

caufe  It  is  given  me  from  the  Wgheji  )  l^f'hicb,  {  Lo  J  is  grown  and  become  a  mighty  Rocl{.  For 
itisfaidofme.  Behold  I  will  vifit  them  that  put  their  truji  in  me^  with  a.  comfortable  jirength  in 
the  time  of  need  ;  For  my  Kock.  is  an  everlajiing  ftrength^  and  the  Hills  of  my  countenance  en- 
dure for  ever.  If  then  I  be  the  Countenance  of  God,  and  a  piercing  fire  fent  out  as  a  fiame^  not 
onelywith  his  great  mercy,  but  with  his  good  will,  and  that  towards you,overitihelmed,not  caji  down, 
hut  almoji  for  ever  buried  in  a  lakf  of  ignorance,  and  incuenchable  flame,  fuch  as  confumetb 
with  ignorance ,  deceit  it  felf ,  and  a  provocation  too  manifeji ,  and  apparent  dejiru- 
aion :  If  I  then  with  this  meffage   (  being  the  meffage  of  truth )  my  felf  a   mean  ....   fufficent 

Order    for  the  publifhmsnt  thereof,  can,  nor  may as  of  ...niam)  vehemently  defpifed' 

C  the  fruits  of  a  good  Confcience,  notwith'ianding  fiedfaji^  Then  is  he  of  no  power  of  whom  I 
am  ....  lecaufe  it  is  written.  Such  as  rife  up  again'l  my  Spirit,  I  will  defiroy  them  in  the  vtidfi  of 
the  fame  fire,  and  will  deliver  their  ajhes  to  the  windes  for  a  memory  of  their  wiekj^dneffe.  But 
heisju'l,  and  is  without  meafure  :  kjiowethwhat  is,  and  what  is  tg  come,  which  hath  thus  fa  id  of 
yoU'  Behold  their  ignorance  is  greater,  and  they  ejieem  not  truth.  Lo  I  have  heard  them,  in  the 
w'idil  of  their  corruption;  yet  they  are  become  faithleffe  :  I  minijier  unto  them,  but  in  vain;  But 
heboid  their  mouths  are  clofed  upwith  idleneffe.  0  ye  of  little  under jianding,  are  you  become  fo 
blinde,  that  you  will  not  fee  ?  Are  the  windows  of  your  eares  made  fajt  agamji  truth?  Are  your 
confciencesfealed  up,  with  a  thrice  burnt  iron  ?  Defire  you  light ^  and  yet  refufe  it  ?  Have  jou 
craved  .  . , ,  and  now  deny  it :  yea  utterly  difdain  it  ? 
A.   That  is  not  true. 

£•  K    Now  Cometh  a  head  behind  him. 

Lo  the  end  fhallbec$me  your  comfort,  if  you  liiien   to  the  fengs  of  my  mouth :  if  not,  ever' 

laflingfolly :  and  a  reward  of  fuch,  as  areweary  to  hear  offrnth.       Now  I  pinched  him 

E.  K-  This  he  laid  looking  behind  him. 

A. 

Burn  thofe  blafphemoui  bookj  of  thine,  and  I  will  teach  thee  wifjom. 

A.  WjII  you  have  me  note  down  that  fentence  fo . 

I  will. 

A.  What  blafphemous  books  can  I  acknowledge,  feeing  I  underftand  none  ?  If  they  con- 
tain Sentence,  makemeto  perceive  it;  that  fo  I  may  compare  it ,  with  the  Touchftone  of 
God  his  word,  ufingthe  Talent  of  fuch  reafon,  as  God  hath  given  me. 

......  1^0,    I  go,    I  go. 

E.  K.  Now  Cometh  a  great  fire  down,  and  there  appeareth  a  great  huge 
man,  with  a^reat  /Tvord  in  his  hand  '■>  fire  comcth  out  at  his  eyes,  and  at  his 
mouth.         This  terrible  man  faid, 

Malediciifunt,  qui'jurati  funt  contra  Nomen  meum. 

E.  K.  Now  that  wicked  creature  fhaketh  himfclf. 

A.  In  nomine  Jefu  Chrifti  Rcdemptoris  hunrani  generis,  Quis  tu  cs  ? 

i  This  was  Ipoken  to  the  man  with  the  1  word.  ] 

Sume  vires, 

A.  Deus  in  adjutorium  meum  intende,   &c.      Miferere  raei  Deus  &c. 

E.  K    Now  the  great  huge  one  kncelcth  down,  and  his  face  is  (  now^ 
from  meward  j  he  lookcth  up  toward  heaven  6    he  hath  very  long  hair,  to 

beneath 


J  true  Relation  of  D''.  Dee  his  Miens  mth  [pints,  (5c c^        57 

beneath  his  girdle  i  his  Robe  is  long  and  tucked  up.  Now  he  ftand- 
cthup. 

Curfei  are  they  :  Curjed  are  they  :  Curfed  is  he  for  ever.        I  am,  I  gave  thee  tower 

ind  fcaled  thee  for  a  time;  Fovcer  to  itfe  thevehemency  of  thine  own  poifon  ;  but  not  to  touch  my 
coat,  'thus  he  faith)  And  (^I  am')  thou  art  a  lyar  from  the  heginning^and  the  fountain  of  curfed' 
ttejfe,  Vamnat'on  is  thy  dwellingplace  ;  Death  is  thy  feat  ;  Vengeance  is  the  Crown  of  thy  difglory. 
Becaufe  thou  ball  entred  into  my  feat  :  Haji  exalted  thy  brightneffe^bUfphemed  my  name  ;  wherei'a 
(  in  this  AUion  )  thou  continueji(  No  pint  of  thy  charge,  nor  of  my  permifion.  )  Be  thou  ac- 
curfed,  weakj-nid,  overthrown,  and  defaced,  "Thou  art  vanqijhed,  7ky  time  isjhortened.  And 
why  ?  I  am.  And  I  fay  thou  fighteft  againjl  me,  and  not  againfi  men.  I  am  Jujiice,  and  the 
Hrength  of  him  that  livetJjyWhom  thou  haJi  felt,  and  ffialt  feel,  vDorld  without  end;  therefore 
Depart;    Depart  I  fay. 

E.  K.  Now  the  fword  ftandcth  by  him,  with  the  rags  that  appeared 
before. 

......  Vengeance,  prepared  for  others,be  thy  reioard  :     As.  it  was  delivered  unto  thee,  fo  ta\e  it 

mth  thee  ;    that  the  malice  which  thou,fhewejt  to  others,  ntay  heap  np  thine  own  dejiruSfioH. 
Jeofah,     Jeovah,     Jeovafcah. 

6.  K'  The  wicked  Tempter  falleth  down  into  a  hole^  and  this  high 
creature  putteth  the  fword  and  rags  down  after  him-  Now  this  great 
creature  appearcth  as  fmall  as  he  ufed  to  do.    And  it  is  Michael, 

Mic.  ......  Veniat  Lux  Domini,  &  fidelium  Confolatio. 

E.K-  Now  is  ail  come  in,  as  was  before  :  The  Vail,  the  feet  of  mcii 
appearing  under,  if^c. 

Mic Ihus  hath  God  dealt  mercifully  with  you. 

ti.  His  Name  be praifed for  ever. 

Mic thiu  hath  Truth  vanquijhed  darkjtefe.     Evenfo  fiallyou  vanquifh  the  World  in  him 

which  it  the  Spirit  of  Power  and  truth.  For  I  have  Swoni  (  faith  the  Lord  J  and  will  he  mer- 
ciful unto  you  :  But  ceafe  for  thefe  daies  to  come ;  for  they  were  daies  delivered  :  Let  them  he 
( therefore  )  unto  you  daies  of  Repentance  :  For  the  end  of  ^o  daies  muji  come  :  And  this  Do- 
Qrine  jhall  he  written  unto  all  Kations,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  World.  The  Grain  is  yet  in  the 
earth,  and  hathnewly  confented  with  the  earth  :  But  when  it  fpringeth,  and  bearethfeed,  the  mm- 
ler  Jhiill  be  the  lajl. 

U.  A  dark  Parable,  to  my  underftanding,  is  this. 

Mic the  transparent  fire  of  Meekiteffe  comfort  and  warm  your  fouls,    re^fte  and  ma1{e 

firong  your  bodies ,  to  the  eternal  comfort  of  the  World  to  come ;  in  the  pilgrimage  vpHch  Jou  Jhall 
endure,  with  a  heavy  crojfe  for  the  teftimonie  of  truth. 

E-  K*  A  gfcat  many  voices,  fay,     ^.Arnen. 

E-  K-  Now  he  is  gone,and  the  golden  Vail  is  drawn  ag^in- 

h.  Omnis  laus,  honor,  Gloria,  Viftoria  &  Triiimphiis  fit  Deo  noftro  omnipotenti.  Vivo  8c 
vero,  nunc, &  in  fempiterna  feculorum  fecula.     Amen. 


Sonday,    22.  DeCembris,    Mane,  we  went  from  Rojloch  toward  Stetin. 

Wenfday,  z'j.Decembris,  on  Chriftmas  Day  morning,  wc  cume  to  Stetin  by  lo  of  the  clock; 


Annoi<)^^.  Stiloveteri. 

Stetini   in    Pomcrania. 

January  2.   MaHe,hora  9. 
A.  Veniat  lux  Domini,    &  fidelium  Confolatio,  &c.  40.  dies,  jam  coniplcti  funt,  &c, 
Expeftamus  ptitpotens  auxilium  Altifsirai,  &c. 

E.  K.  1  cannot  fee  but  an  inch  into  the  Stone.  The  Curtain  ap- 
pearcth, but  more  deep  into  the  Stone  At  length  cometh  one 
very  tall,  in  a  long  white  Gown,  all  open,  and  his  hair  of  his  head  hanging 
down  to  his  legs.  He  hath  wings  upon  his  head,  armes,  back,  and  legs. 
Hefcemeth  to  defcend  from  the  Clouds,  and  upon  Clouds  which  lie  floape^ 
Wife  for  his  defccnding.       He  fpeaketh  as  follovvcth- 

I  the 


T 


S      A  true'^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mthjpints,  6cc> 


The  pi>renejfe  ofkumiltty^  difperfed  through  the  inward-bowels  of  man,  is  that.whtch  is  cal- 

led  (  with  \ou)?erfezerance.         H^hich   Per  fever  mcej  hemttfieth  and  ejiabliflieth  in  a.  true  and 
fiedfad  Bafts  thofe  thi>tgs  that  are   acceptable   in   the  fight  of  God,  the  worses  of  man.       Hence 

fvrinmh  jujiifiratton,  which with  the  love  of  God.        Herein   are  you  become  like  unto  uf^ 

for  that  we  are  the  image  ofPerfeverance,  and  the  Glory  of  God.  But  in  Uf  it  a  dignified :  U 
\ou  It  if,  and  Willi  be  imperfea :     For  nothing  U  of  fiejh  or  blood,  that  receiveth  perfedion. 

the  Emanations  from  God,  to,  and  into  his  creatures  (  which  agree  in  the  Center  of  the  Earth 
<M  the  kjiitting  up  of  things  )  are  ejiablijhed  :  So  that  one  jot  of  his  Will  neither  can,  nor  may  per- 
/7/j,  wjx  w.al{_,  or  dwell  in  error  :  Which  for  efeen  from  the  beginning,  carrieth  in  it  felf  there- 
vienibrance  of  all  things  to  the  end.  through  which  mercy  and  remembrance,  you  are  become  the 
fervants  of  God  :  Not  for  your  own  fakes  ■■,  but  in  that  it  is  the  Glory  of  him,  which  hathcalledyou 
Otr  Calling   ^^  ^^^  exernfe  :    Irouhlefome  to  the  World,  hut  rewarded  with  Glory. 

or  Exercife.  ^j-  ^^^^^^^^^  ^^„^  imperfections  rife  up  and  refiji  the  Will  of  God,  faying,  blafphemoufly  as  you  do; 

Let  usfeek  other  wayes,  then  you  are  not  counted  perpverers  ,  neither  are  your  work?  worthy 
reward:  But  humane  reafon  canperfwade  and  give  judgement  again'fthefe  follies,  much  more- 
are  they  damnable,  and  deferve  correction  in  the  voice  and  judgement  of  fiich  as  are  pure. 

He  that  dealeth  with  the  wicked  is  a  lyar,  and  (hall  have  his  reward  :  But  the  end  of  comfort  it 
in  thepureneffe  offpirit.  But  0  you  of  little  wifdnm,  you  rife  up  againji  thewindes,  and  yoke 
your  wits  agaiml  the  mountains :  Nay  you  cafi your  felves  down  heaHong,  where  there  is  m  mercy. 
for  wkatb/afphemie  is  it  to  fay.  If  it  "be  the  will  of  God,  it  muft  follow  >  Is  not  7nan  fuljeU  to 
the  bringing  in  of  his  own  labours  ?     And  are  7tot  they  allowed  to  his  comfort,  being  brought  in  > 

the  foul  of  man  is  the  image  of  God,  after  his  form,  which  kpepeth  within  himfelf  the  power  of 
his  divinity  in  the  heavenly  Spirit,  whereby  he  hath  A'tthority  to  confent  with  God  in  the  workntan- 
[fjipof  his  Will  and  Creatures :  yvhirh  Power  being  fealed  already,  giveth  mto  man  (  as  King  of 
himself)  to  confent  to  his  own  falvation,  conjoyning  and  knitting  himfelf  together,  either  with  per- 
fever  ance  in  the  affured  hope  of  mercy,  or  (  with  wilfull  drunkenneffe,  )  to  the  reward  of  fuch  as 
fall.  therefore.  Become  Holy.  For  the  foul  beautifieth,  when  it  is  beautified  in  itfelf.  Re-i 
fiji  not  the  Will  of  God,  which  is  mighty  on  you  :   Be  not  obftinate. 

Be  humble,  Rejoyce  mtfor  this  World  :  But  be  glad  that  your  names  are  fealed,  and  that  you 
fhall  correft  the  World.  Befpair  not  through  wea\neffe  ;  for  from  whom  Cometh  jirength  ?  If 
puddles  become  Seas,  the  end  is  more  wonderful :  But  yet  greater  when  fimers  are  called  to  the 
knowledge  and  perffrmance  of  God  his  Will,  thorough  his  mercies.  Even  as  one  day  perijheth, 
and  is  not,  although  he  hath  been  ;  Even  fo  it  is,  and  flyall  be  the  ftate  of  this  World.  For  the 
Earth  muli  fingO  Sannawith  the  Heavens  ,  And  there  muji  be  One  veritie.  And  Hierufalem 
fhall  defcend  with  an  horn  of  glory  to  the  end,  the  Sun  and  Moonjhall  be  witneffts,  and  wonder 
at  their  jhy.  the  Kings  of  the  Earth  fhall  become  proud  in  themfelvesf  and  are  unable  to  be  tamed 
with  T?tan. 

But  I  will  yoke  them  (  faith  the  Lord  Jv/khcoTreStion-:,  And  force  them  one  to  imitate  ano~ 
thers  fleps  :  Tea.  they  (fjall  tread  the  grapes  alike  ;  For  in  my  Vineyard  C'rruption  fhall  not  dwelt 
With  Authority  :  Neither  pall  the  Frince  of  t)arkneffe  ufurpe  my  further  honour. 

€•  K'  He  fpcaketh  much  in  almaliervoicethanhcdid-  I  cannot  per-' 
ceive  it-  ]  He  turned  back  and  fpakc* 

J  fpeak.thefe  things  for  your  under ji  and  ing,  and  that  you  vtaybeflrengthened, 

E,K.  He  turnech  back  again  (as  before)  and  fpeaketh  I  know  not 
what. 

My  dear  brethren,theref ore  rejoyce  in  Comfort,    and  the  image  of  Peace  :    and  remain 

faithful,  that  you  may  he  fed  with  that  food  that  Ihall  preferve  and  alwaies  refl  before  the  mighty 
flames  of  Zanzor ;  where  there  dvPelleih  no  defiled  Creature,  nor  any  unrighteoufneffe. 

£.K.  He turneth now  back  again  (as before)  fpeaking.   Hefecmeth 

now  to  lean  againft  a  Pillar  of  Copper,  great  and  round  :  And  he  is  become 

IcfTe  than  he  was-  Now  heftand.th  on  the  top  of  the  Pillar,   Now  he  knee;: 

icth  down,  his  back  being  turned- 

A  voice  faith  to  him  Svpear CO 

He  faid  It  is  done. 

He  faid thf  firjivoice  openeth  his  mouth  and  faith  [  there  is  a  great  rumbling  and  row 

Jhings  of  falling  of  towns  or  Houfs,   as  it  were  in  the  Stone,  3 

Heiaid thewillofGod  is  fealed  in  this  Prophefe,  and  it  fhall  endure. 

^^A voice Swear  [2] 

"lie  faid I  have  done. 

■;"'~Hefaid  .......  It  thundereth,  and  it  is  thefecond  voice.         the  efFeftof  God  his  \Y\\\,'ismt 

of  time  ;  and  therefore  not  to  bek^own  of  man,  till  that  moment  and  end  of  time  J^:all  appear, 
vhenin  it  mujt  bepubliJJjed,  and  finijhed  with  power.  "_ 

E.  K.  Now 


(tA  true  %elation  of  Jy^  Dee  his  JBions  mthffirits,  Sec.       55? 

E.  K-  Now  it  thumblech  again  very  terribly,  as  chough  a  whole  Town 

fhould  fall  down  inco  a  great  V'alley- 

A  voyce stvear Lsl 

'  He  faid I  have And  it  it  the  third,  and  the  lajl  voyce.       All  things  that  arecrookfd 

Jhall  be  made  Jhaight.       The  foinde  of  the  heavens  Jhall  walk^  through  all  the  earth.        Wifdom  jhull 
fit  in  her  Majejiie,  Crowned^  in  the  top  of  an  Hill,  with  exalted  glorie. 

It  is  the  end. 

£.  K-  Now  all  dafheth  in  a  flame  of  fire, Pillar,  and  he,  and  all,  and  fd 
flicth  upward. 

A  voyce He  that  hath  ears-,  let  him  hear. 

Another  \oyce.  It  (hall  be.     Amen. 

E-  K.  Now  the  Curtain  coiheth  before  all^as  ic  was  at  the  begfnning,this 
day. 

A.  O  Lord,  for  thy  great  niyfteries  declared  unto  us  (this  day)  vye  moft  humbly  thank  thee. 
But  on  our  parts,  there  remaineth  fome  matter.  ....  thy  hands  by  feme  ot  thy  good  Minifters, 
vvede/irc  to  have  fome  advertifemenc :  as  of  the  Lord  AibtLaskje.  Secondly,  oi  Vincent  Seve^ 
&c. 

£•  K'  A  very  little  Creature  appeareth,  and  faith 

The  little  one.  A  word,  and  away.  The  hearts  ofPrinces^  are  the  fecrets  of  the  Lord:  Such 
they  are,  as  unlock^  the  doings  of  this  world. 

A.  Oi  A.  L.  his  delay  in  coming  (contrary  to  our  defire  and  expeftacion)  I  would  gladly 
underftand  the  caufe,  &c. 

The  little  one.   Thofe  things  that  are  efwick^dneffe,  are   not  of  our  remembrance.  ,     'thU  (lay  ■ 
Jhall  hinder  a  third  part  of  hit  glory.       But  all  your  life  is  not  of  him  :  Nor  he  of  you.        If  he        N^te. 
become  good:  hefliallbe  well  rewarded.         He  is  forward  ,  Vincent  is  in  France.  Ok  A.  L.  and 

5.  K-  He  is  gone  fuddenly.    This  Creature  ftood  between  the  Curtain,  T  ^'/""""S 
and  the  forepart  or  the  llonc,it  was  one  or  the  Icaft  Creatures  that  ever  I 
favv- 

A.  All  Honour,  praife,  and  thanks  be  to  our  God  Almighty  :  now  and  ever.     Amen. 

Thurfday,  Januarii  9.    The  Lord  Albert  Laskje  came  to  Stetin,  Her.  2  ;.  aMeridie. 

Fryday,  Janurii  10.  lAal^i^t  itiv^iai  usffosj/ft  Tma-aQ-  n(*.  Hora  prima  incipiebatf  &  per  2.  horof 
durabat*        Stetini. 


\    tut 


Sonday,  12.  Januarii.     .1584.  Stetin. 

A.    After  Dinner  we  were  talking  together  of  our  affairs.         A  voyce  in  E.  K.  his  head 
faid. 

Jam  venithora. 

A.   After  Supper,  a<  1  had  a  defire  to  fhew  to  E.  K.   fome  places  of  St.  Johns  Apocalypfis,  a 
voyce  faid  to  him, 

Equtis  albus  eji  initium  VoUrinx  veflra  ,  Et  eji  verbum  Dei.  ^  voyce.' 

10.&  p.  funt  N'>vemdecim.  Eqmis Albus. 

A.  Hereupon  feeking  in  the  19.  Chapter  of  the  Apocalypfis  :  we  found  the  Text  ,     Equuf  al~ 

i  us.  Sec.  V  erf  It  11, 

A  voyce.    Ne  d'.<bites.  Sum  enini  fervus  Dei.       To  this  purpofe  appertain  thefe  places  of  Scrip- 
re,  &c.  ^     Thefe  are  the  dayes  wherein  the  Frophet  faid ,   No  faith  Jhould  be  found  on  the  earth,  vide  Efdra 
This  Faith  muji  be  rejio'red  again,  and  man  muji  glorifie  God  in  his  works.         I  am  the  light  of  )Jb.4  cap.  9. 

God.  ^cfju  7. 

A.  Then,  by  like.  He  is  Zv  it  J  EL, 
......  I  am  a  witnejfe  of  the  light.  Tiefe  are  the  times  when  Juflice  and  truth  miifi  ta}{e  place. 

Behold,  I  touched  him,  and  he  became  a  Prophet," 
A.  Mean  you  Efdras  ? 
Vriel.   1  ea  ,  in  his  ninth  Chapter  of  the  fourth  book.       There  you  Jhall  finde  manifeftly  the  Pro-  this  aaion  ir 

fhefieof  this  time,  and  this  aaion.  EfJras^tophe 

^.  Alak,  we  think   the  time  very  long,  kefore  we  entred  in  the  ri"ht  trade  of  our  trucked  of. 

leiTons. 

Ur.  When  you  havt_  the  hook^  of  God  before  you.  Then  I  will  open  thefe  fecrets  unto  you.' 
A.  But  Alak ,  the  time  is  very  long  thereunto,  the  more  is  our  grief. 

I  2  Ur.  Tie' 


6o        A  tmeKelation  ofD'.  Dee  his  Actions  whfpirits,  &ic. 


Ur.   "the  Bible  itif.  ,     ,  •         . 

A.  I  meant  fomewhat  of  our  other  book,  which  is  to  be  written. 

Ur.  Iwtllfpeak^of  that  alfo. 

A.  This  delay  is  greatly  to  our  grief ,  and  occafion  of  many  temptations.  -  •     . 

lir.  The  temptations  of  ike  world  are  mthingunto  the  wife,huppie  are  they  that  feel  temptations 
•srith  ewptintjfc-  of  the  bellj,  7he  limber  is  not  yet  feafoned,  or  elfethouJhouldeJiPropheffe.  I 
mean  jiot  tfcee  E.  K. 

A.  Vincat  mauifefta  Veritas. 

£•  iC,  He  is  gone. 

Honor,Gloria,Laus,&  benediftio,fit  DcoNoItro  ,  qui  in  A  L  BO    E  Q.U  O  Jufti- 

tias  luas  tafturuseft.       Amen. 


Monday- J^niiarii  1^.  LManehora,  p,.  Stctin. 

A.  After  our  long  difcourfe  upon  the  9*^.  Chapter  oiEfdnWy  8ic.  Vriel  came,  and  flood, 
he ly.  upon  £.  K.his  head,  not  vifibly, 

llr.  Read  the  fixth  Chapter.  For  faith  mujl  flottrijh.  I'he  world  is  rotteHi  and  itskalden  in 
their  own  fins. 

A.  E.  K.  Read  it,  and  in  the  28.  verfe,  thus  it  is.  Florebit  autem  fides,  &:  vincetur  cor- 
rupcela,  Sc  oftendetur  Veritas,  qux  fine  fra Diebus  tantij,  &c. 

E.  K.  A  voyce  faith,  Open  the  Shew- ftonc-  5 

E.  K.  Ac  length  appared  one  in  a  long  white  Garment-  The  Curtain' 
went  allde,  and  the  fccc  of  men  appear  not  now-  This  man  feemeth 
iw^ce  fo  high  as  A^  He  hath  nothing  on  his  hca^l,  but  long  hair  hanging 
down  behinde  him.  He  is  ticd^or  girded  abouc,as  though  he  were  tied 
vvith  many  giidles* 

^•.  IIR.IEL.    I  aniVriel{_faid  this  man'jThe  light,  and  hand  of  him  that  created  Heaven   and 

Earth. -that  talkj-d  with  ILidizs,  and  did  cotnfort  him  tn  affliction,  and  the  fame  that  hath  tallied 
vithyou  :  Yea  ,  from  the  beginning  of  this  aftion.  Therefore,  ^ird  your  felves  together  )  and 
hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  :  Lijien,  (I  fay')  to  fiich  things  at  are  hid,  (I  fay")  to  them  that  dwell  above 
the  Heavens.  Behold,  this  is  the  laji  .fleep  of  the  world  :  and  the  time,that  the  power  of  the  highefl 
hath  armed  hinfelf ,  faying.  Come,  0 ye  jlrength  of  the  Heavens,and  follow  we.  For  the  earth 
hath  cned  vengeance,  andbith  curfed  herfelf ,  and  defpaireth.  Come  (/  fay")  For  Iwill  place  the 
feat  ofrigbteoifneffe.  Ibtt  my  Kingdom  maybe  in  One  :  And  that  my  people  may  flourifh  :  Yea, 
even  a  licilc  before  the  end. 

And  what  is  this  ?        E-K.   He  fpake  thefe  four  words  in  another  Tune. 

£-K-  Hs  lookech  up  to  heaven- 

A  voyce.  Bhffed  art  thou,  which  refpe&eft  thy  Juftice,  and  not  the  fiHs  of  man* 
iio^takinc  Ur.   Ihis  is  the  voice  of  the  Angel  thzLtwovi  tdiVtth.  Y>\?ice. 

plic«'  A.  May  we  be  fo  bold  as  to  demand  the  name  of  that  Angel  ? 

Ur.  ■  No,  It  is  not  lawful/.       1  fwear  by  all  things  that  are  contained  within 

/nOith.        this  holy  book,:  ^  By  the  feat  of  God  ,  and  him  that  fitteth  thereon.       that  the  *  Note.he  fpake  this, 

-.voyds  .^y'-.ch  httvt  been  fpokfn  in  this  Adion  ,   and  pall  be  now  fpo^en,  by  me,  pointing    do.vn     to 

j4  Prophcf.e.    ^re  true  :  three  years  are  yet  to  come  ;  even  in  this  moneth  ,  (that  beginneth  [^'f  j".  ulmlJ. 

an  )j87.  in    the  fourth  year )  jhall  the  Son  of  perdition  be  known  unto  the  whole  world  :  „„  whicli  the  Shew- 

Jafiu-io.         Suddenly  creeping  out  of  his  hole  likf  an  Adder,  leading  out  her  young  ones  af-  ft«ne,  nowj  flood, 
v^mich  iftus.    ^^j.  jj^f  fg  devour  the  duji  of  the  earth. 
St  ji:nrhcit:r,                ^                                 ^      ■'                      * 
fic  annus  ej}  in-                                  n                ■               ■ 

telligendHi,fin:nf^f'"'ri'*!ii'ius,  noflroruti  annorura  %i.fnhahenddspromo  anno tnyjlico :  vel  ^i.tnenfes,  fyc,  Perpende. 

A,   The  fentence  is  dark,  in  refpeft  of  the  time.       Confider  well. 
A.   1  fufpcft  4''-  moneths  (now  and  then)  to  be  underftood  for  an  year. 

,      _  Ur.  Ihis  moneth  in  the  fourth  year  .^'fliafl  Antichrvi  be  l{nowminto  all  the  world.         then  Jh  all 

/ouch  .ftus.   yf^^ypQ^dtvell  awongll  the  Kings  of  the  earth:  For  they  jhall  be  chofen  all  anew.       Neither  Jhall 

rTt'i  I'lrribur.t  ^^^^^  ""y  ^^"^  ^"^^^^'  ""*>  <*''  reignetha^  a  King^  or  Govermur  of  the /f,  live  unto  the  end  of  the 

.inff  le^tiuti     third  year :  But  they  Jhall  all  perijh. 
4iSnuihpaitiim.      their  Kingdoms  I  e  overthrown. 

the 


J  true  ^^eUtion  of  D*".  Dee  his  Jclions  Xi>tth  fpiritSy  &ic^         6t 

Tie  earth  wajud.  "the  Khers  become  bloud ,  with  the  hloud  of  met:  and  beajts  iftixedtoge-  ^■'^"'P'"'  4^- 
ther.  la  this  time  Jhall  ihe  Turkjffj  liatehe  rooted  up  ,  and  raji  f-om  the  earth.  And  i»iiead'^'^'^''J''^^'^° 
of  bint  Jhail  enter   in  that  Vfvil  :  the  father  nf  liars  3  and  fuch  as  dwell  in   the  houfe  ofVa~  Myfilcoitiius 

**'^y-  Be-^o/'^,  This  *  Prince  fhall  fly  through  his  Kingdoms,  .w  tif"jvr,f,'j^yj/:  x.ei 
^.Iheyaie  in  Pira  ife ,  Greyhound  after  his  fpoyl :  devouring  his  poHefTions,  and  cutting  duwnanmt  vilgaris 
efpecraUy  £/;-'/.  '     ihe  wicked:   But  he  ftiall  become  proud.        llje  Prophets  of  the  Lord  I"  "^^^""""'Ji- 

■;  Jfjd/l  defccnd  from  Heaven  y  cloathed  with  their  old  Garments   very  fr^J^^i^Anr;  h  ;""■ 

and  not  liained.       Thy  eyts  fr^all  fee  them.       Out  of  thele  books  fhall  the   true  Doftrine^^pfr^)^/' 
of  the  Prophcts.,and  Ap'jiles  be  gathered :  Which  are  mt  to  be  imderjiood ,  but  wnh  the  fpirit  of  un-        A.L. 
derfiandtngi  thefpirit  ofwifdom,  and  truth.        Behold,  I  will  fay  untojou  my  felf,  Enoch. 

Cii  £liaf. 

ome,  Hear.  Omfign. 

For^  the  voyce  of  the  Lord  is  with  power.         Therefore^  be  wi'de,  and  of  humble  fp/rit.      For  lo, 
the  time  pull  come.     y4«^//['rfi'e  feven  iiooJ^j  ,fuch  as  lliall  be  delivered  unco  one  of  you.      Andl.Librttnt-' 
I  will  meet  thee  walkjng  in  the  fields.      And  Will  firetch  forth  my  hand,  faying,  Come  :  Then, fh a  11'^"^'^'  'if'  ^, 
thine  eyes  fee  th  fe  things,  that  thy  fpirit  doth.     And  tbo(*_(halt  becom;  a  man  of  nnderftanding  ; 
For  I  will  give  thee  bread  ,  and  thou  (lialt  eat  it,  fuch,  as  fiiall  be  the  bread  of  fufficieaC 
comfort. 

E.  K.  •  Ic  chundreth  in  the  ftone.      Of  thee^  [pointing  to  6,  K!.]  thus  fayeth 
ihe  Lord.  < 

Thou  art  flejh  ,  and  become  ftu'^horn.  Thy  judgement  vaxeth  dull  ^  and  thy  heart  fealed:  But  1  e.K. 
willunfeal  thee  ;and  thou  Ihalt  be  partaker  :  Bttt  (becaufethou  haji  offended  vie^  not  with  power 
inworldly  things^  J  will  make  thee  a  great  Seer  :  Such  an  one-,  as  fljall  judge  the  Circle  $f  things  in 
nature.  But  heavenly  underiiandinz,,  and  fpiritual  knowledge  jhall  be  fealed  up  frotn  thee  in  this 
world  :  For,  thou  art  become  jiony,  ani  haji  cried  out  againlt  my  Saints.  Notwhhliunding  ,  your 
life  flial!  be  together.  Thou  jhalt  he  a  workjnan  of  nature,  lookjnginto  the  Chanihers  o!^  the  earth : 
The  Trealures  of  men  Many  things  are  pluckt  from  thee,  which  were  thine  :  Bat  not  from 
you,  becaufe  I  have  promifed  hem, 

JFhat  if  he,  th.it  bridled  the  Windes.,  A.  At  your  prayers  ?  Or,  who  is  he  that  preserved  you 
from  the  bloudy  imaj^inarions  of  men,  [_and'j  hatreds  of  the  world  invincible  ?  Is  it  not  be,  that  is 
God  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ?  Is  it  n  t  hr,  that  made  both  jieflo  and  Soid  ?  lea-,  even  he  it  is  ,  that 
fayeth.  Fly  from  j/.??  wicii^f-^^f^ft',  and  fociety  with  Devils,  Leave  off  to  fm  againji  the  Lord : 
for  ht  is  of  great  powfr.  Th:s  is  the  IdH  time  thdt  any  JJjew  jhall  be  made  in  this  jione.  i^or, /<;,  This  fcntencs. 
the  promife  of  the  moji higheji  jkall be  fulfilled.  is  revoked  af- 

E.  K.  Now  /  ice  a'j  chofe  men  ,  whofe  fecc  /  faw  before :  And  there  fir-lheZne  dj? 
tethOneina  Jadgcmentfcac^withall  his  teeth  fiery'  And  there  fit  fix, "'fi^''-- 
on  one  fide  ot  him,  and  i\x  on  the  other.  And  there  fit  twelve  in  a  lower 
feat  under  them»  All  ihe  place  is  like  Gold  ,  garnillied  with  precious  IloncSj 
On  his  head  is  a  gre u  ftcne;  covering  his  head  i  a  ftone  moft  bright,  brigh. 
tcr  then  fire.  Four  bring  in  a  man  bound.  Now  all  is  gone  except 
Vfiel. 

Ur,  The  end  of  words,  the  beginning  of  deeds. 

A  voyce.  Sea'  it  up  :  For,  it  is  at  an  end. 

A,  What  is  your  will,  that  I  fhall  do  with  this  ftone. 

Ur.    All  is  [aid  :  and  I  am  fealed  for  time  to  come. 

i^.  Deo  omn-pocenci,  vero,  vivo,  Si  .eterno  fit  omnis  honor,  L2Us,G!oria,Potentia,  vir^ 
tus  &  viftoria  :  nunc  8c  in  fcmpitcrna  feculorum  fecula.      Amen. 


Wednesday,  January  r  5,  we  went  from  Stetin  to  Stargirt, 
iJo^^f?)',  January  19.    we  came  to  Pafcw. 

Eeclefia  Cath^dralis  FoGtinfnfis  fnndabatnr  anno  1025.  /^^r  Wincenaum  Regem  Chriiiia-^ 
Hum  factum  cuJM  fepulcbrum  in  infer  iorl  ^arte  Ecclefix  extat  ,  la  fide  eg^egie  extra- 
dum.  ,  ,        ,      ,  ' 

Saturday,  January  25.  'O  «:>/(,■>©-  udyts  t»  Q^ivdvis  Sia.  ri);  tx  E.  K.  aJV/Kiaj  ititidMs  ecayrioy  «h*, 
(i.e.   (JMagnum  adnvit£peri:ulnm  per  iniquitatem  E.  K.   contra  me.) 

Sunday,]m\wy  26.  ......  Invifeham  Biblnthecam  Ecclefix  Cathedralis, 

M5«^tfj,  Jamiary  27,         f.^^i  x.fi  o^oe*  <;?.««.   (Kix£  cum  uxore breves.). 

TueJ day,  J znua]  J  2S.   We  went  from  F/^^. 

Thurfday,  Jan.  30.     We  came,to  Komih  f  own^  over  the  Ion?  and  dangerous  Bridge  ,  with 
much  cumber  at  one  broken  place,  by  reafon  of  the  huge  Cake's  cflce^  which  lay  there, 

SatiiT" 


6z       A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  ABlons  mthff'mts,  &c. 


Saturdaj^Fehruariiy  i.  We  pafTed  the  dangerous  way  of  Ice,  having  25  men  to  cut  the  Ice 
for  our  C  caches  to  come  through  above  two  Englifh  miles  long  ;  but  for  all  that  great  help, 
we  could  not  get  to  Vmew  City  that  night,  by  reafon  of  the  great  water  and  Ice  hard  b/ 
the  Town,  wjiich  was  broken  over  the  banks  into  the  medows  very  deep. 

Sotiday,  Februarii  2.   We  came  over  the  great  water,  the  Ice  being  moft  part  (  with  that 
nights  wiiide)  driven  away  out  of  our  paflage. 

Monday^  Feb.  3.  We  came  by  Shadek^to  Lask?  Town,  and  there  were  lodged  in  thePro- 
voft  his  fair  houfcby  the  Church, 


Prima  A&io  apud  Lasko. 
Tuefday  Februarii  11.  Stilo  veteriy  ail  21.  Stilo  novo. 

ti,.  After  our  prayers  of  they  Pfalms,  and  my  particular  invitation  and  calling  for  God 
his  help,  and  the  mimftery  of  his  good  Angels :  After  (  I  fay  )  more  than  halfan  hour  fpacc 
attendance;  £.£.  feemed  and  thought  that  he  felt  a  thing  about  his  head,  as  if  it  clawed 
with  Hawks  claws.  It  continued  no  long  time.  And  toward  the  Eafterly  corner  of  my 
creat  Study  Jibove,  feemed  to  £.  if.  clouds  to  appear, far  off,  as  at  a  quarter  of  a  miledi- 
ftance.  Then  appeared  a  Sea,  endlefle  oneway,  and  a  Haven  mouth  with  a  River  which 
fell  or  ran  into  that  mouth.  And  befides  that  River  doing  down  into  the  Haven,  did  an- 
other River  appear  by  running  into  the  Sea,  without  any  Haven  making  or  having.  The 
water  of  this  Sea,  is  not  like  Sea-water,  but  rather  like  Qliickfilver.  Now  cometh  a  moun- 
tain, and  fwimmech  upon  that  main  Sea.  Now  that  mountain  feemeth  to  reft  andftand  be- 
fore that  River  mouth,  that  is  by  the  Haven. 

A  voice Measure  me, 

E.  K.  Now  feemeth  a  great  thing  like  a  man  to  ftand,  with  one  leg  in 
the  forcfaid  driver,  and  with  the  other  in  the  f  aid  5ea,  by  „  having  a  corner 
of  the  •••  id  between  his  laid  legs.  His  right  leg  is  in  theRivcr,and  hislefc 
in  the  Sea-  His  right  leg  feemeth  gold,  and  his  left  leg  lead.  The  moun- 
tain ftandeth  before  him.  His  legs  are  like  two  pofts,  of  the  fubftance 
of  the  Rainbow-  He  is  very  high:  he  hath  a  face,  but  with  many  eyes 
andnofes,butnotdiftin(ftlyto  bcdifccrned.  His  body  feemeth  to  be  red 
Braffe.  He  ftandeth  with  his  arms  abroad,  and  no  hands  appear.  His 
right  arme  is  of  the  colour  of  filver  i  Bis  left  arme  feemeth  to  be  black, 
twinkling.  His  head  is  much  of  the  colour  of  that  Sea  wherein  his  left 
leg  ftandeth-  Now  beginneth  a  right  hand  to  appear  i  a  fair  right 
hand. 

A  voice  fald  to  this  man Meafure  the  water. 

He  anfwered It  is  250  Cubits.  . 

A  voice Meafure  that  foot  of  earth,  ■ 

E.  K-  He  pointcth  to  the  mountain. 

Anfwer It  is  a  cube  twice  doubled  in  himfelf  in  a  ftraight  line, 

E-  K'  One  fpeaketh  behind  me,  faying- 

Meafure  the  Sea  alfo- 

Anfwer It  is  750.  Cubits. 

3,  in  4.  effici-      E.  K-  He  now  ftoopcth  to  it,  and  taketh  of  it  in  his  hand- 

ify  in  fe  effici'c       He  faith The  fourth  in  the  third,  and  three  in  himfelf  fquare.       The  age  of  Nature. 

1'  ^S«nr'"      ^'  ^  Now  all  is  gone,  all  is  clear,  and  nothing  appeareth- 

108.  A,  At  length  after  this,  E.  K.  heard  from  the  forefaid  corner  of  the  Study,  the  noife,  as 

of  a  Ship  tolled  and  jolted  of  the  waves  of  the  Sea.  After  that  E.  K.  faw  one  that  flood  all 
covered  in  a  white  cloud  by  the  Eafterly  corner  of  the  Table,  aboVe  the  Table  in  the  Air. 
He  faid. 

Beati  funt^quihiw Veritas  ^  fpes,  &  anfolatio  ell :  &  quibiu  luminaria  majora   infer' 

viunt,  ift  fortitudine  &  potentia  xterni  &  Omnipotentis  Dei. 

R.iC,  Now  the  cloud  covereth  him,  andabidcth- 
E.  K.  is^ow  he  cometh  out  of  the  cloud ,  and  ftepeth  three  fteps  fors 

ward 


(^true  Sf^elation  of  I>.  Dee  his  JHions  mth  fpirits,  &c.       63 


ward, and chc  cloud  ftandcch  behind  him,  like  a  garment At  length 

he  faid. 

Then  is  their  blejfednejfe^  eternal  life. 

E,  K.  I  never  Taw  him  before:  He  is  covered  with  a  red  Purple  Robe, 
fuch  as  my  Lord,  here,  ufeth  •  but  made  fomewhac  like  a  SurplefTc.  His 
head  is  covered  with  feathers  hke  Down  •*  His  face  is  hke  a  childcs  face :  His 
neck  is  bare  :  His  legs  are  ba .  •  •  •  mod  white :  His  garment  comcth  not  but 
tothcfmallofhislcg.  He  ftandcthupona  white  great  round  Table,  like 
Chryftal,  all  written  with  letters,  infinitely-  On  the  middle  of  the  Table  is  a 
great  fwelling  or  pommel  of  the  fame  fubflance  the  Table  is  of.  Upon  that 
pommel  he  ftandeth-  He  hath  nothing  in  his  hands,-  neither  can  his  hands 
be  difccrncd-    His  Robe  hath  no  llecvcs-  V 

Hcfaid NoH  pojfiim  diutiits  videri :     Servuf  fum  Altiffimi :  Novi  Terram  in  faradifo, 

Sfiritus fttni  SATIENt I M  :   Nomen meum  e}iNALVAGE. 

E»  K.  He  makcth  a  crofTe  upon  the  place  where  he  ftandeth- 

Nal Beatus Filter :  Eeatiu   Filiiu:  Beatm   SpiritM   SanUtu.     Bea  . .  ,tu .,  .t  Menfu- 

ratio\rerftm&  ftibjlantiarum  omnium  vifibilium  &inviftbiliumy  verui  &  fanCtm  ejt  Deus  z«pro- 
niillis  fuis  &  veritafejttSjTalit  eft. 

£'K.  Hereupon  he  (hevvcth  a  round  Globe. 

.,.•...  C-<fluniy  MmduSi  JngeliHi  Homo,  Nihil,  &  non  nihil,  &  oimie  quod  efi,  vel  erit.  Nihil  e^, 
nififplendor,Gtibernatio,&unitas  Dei :  ^£  a  Centra  formata  eji  reformata  cji,  ab  initio  ad 
tewpus  menfuratftm,  &  in  perpetunnt,  Laus  tibi  in  Ccelo,  Laiu  tibi  in  Terra,  TriHmphus  tibi  in  in~ 
ferno,  abi  non  eji  Lam,  nee  Gloria,  ^£ 'j'aminfufa.feHtio,  doceo  :  Sed  modo,  lingua,  &  ideo~ 
iitatep-ddiUo. 

E.  K.  He  turneth  round  when  he  fpcakcth- 

Nal Omnii  Caro  maximb  ejl  fibi  appJicabilis,  m  naturit  &  jperfedione  fna.     Jgitur  reve-> 

Undafunt  Myjieria  Dei,  non  ut  audiantnr,fed  «t  intelligantur.  ' 

E.  K'  Now  cometh  a  great  fmoak :  now  I  fee  nothing  -.  now  he  is  gonc^ 

A  voice. ,  Hear. 

Le.  k.  I  fee  nobody.] 

E-  K.  Mechinketh  that  two  fpeak,  or  clfe  this  voice  givcth  an 
eccho^ 

The  unpatient  and  troahlefome  fpirits  of  indignation,wrath,  blafphemy,  and  difobedience, 

eontinually  contend,  bear  arms,  and  ravenoufly  run  wilfully,  againjl  thofe  that  are  the  . .  .  .  Mejfa- 
gers  and  Angles  of  the  Dignified  and  Triumphant  Glorj  :  which  is  now  the  Miniliery  of  him  that  it 
Dignified  in  his  Father  :  To  the  honour  and  glory  of  thofe  that  are  humble  and  faithful  inebeiience. 
Tea  thofe  wicked  ones  keep  open  wars  againji  God^  and  his  Annointed  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  onety 
for  the  fafegnard  and  true  kjepiig  of  fuch  ds  love  God,  and  follow  his  Commandments, rejoyce  in 
Truth,  aM  are  vifited  in  Righteoufnejfe. 

Dark,fpeeches  to  the  fiefl> :  but  words  mixed  with  humane  imderjlanding  ;  wherein  briefly 
I  will manifefl  the  envy  betweenthe wicked  (  in  refpe&  of  their  envioufnejfe  )  and  thofe  that  are 
jujiified  in  Heaven;  which  fight  in  the  government  of  mans  foiil  in  the  Creatures  of  God  :  Not  in 
that  they  k}iow  they  Jhall  overcome  :  But  in  that  they  are  envious  and  proud  from  the  beg' nning. 

Their  contention  IS  evidently  amongfl  you,  which  are  joyned  in  the  fervice  of  God  :  Not  asVe- 
fervers,  but  as  Chofen  j  whofe  vejfels  and  power,  are  beji  k.nown  unto  God 

E.K-  One  ftandeth  on  my  left  ihoulderand  faith- 

Sinijier Doft  thounot  hear,  how  likeafool  he  fpeaketh,  without  all  reafon  ?     Thou 

art  a  fpirit  of  lying.  Thou  art  one  fartheft  from  the  glorj^  of  God.  Thou  art  afower  of 
lyes,  and  a  teacher  of  falfe  doftrine. 

t^-K.  Thus  faith  he  on  my  left  hand. 

Sinifier Speak,  for  I  have  power  over  thee.  Ci-yjfl;  thou  deny  it  ? 

Dexter..! Thouthinkeft  fo,  becattfe  thou  hadjl  power:.    But  the  brightneffe  thou  hadj},  is. 

turned  into  iniquity,  Trueitis,thouhadli\>ov;evtobaniJ}jthe  wicked  out  ofParadife:  But 
>'ie  thou  knowefi  not  j  becaufe  thou  ha,x  not  bamjhed  me.  In  refpeci  of  thy  dignification  (  which 
fprangwitb  power  )  I  fay  with  the  Hallelujah  :  But  in  refpeS  of  thy  fall.  Thin  faith  the  Lord  i 
Pofui  tenebras  ii  rergo  meo. 

,  Si>iifter Fy  upon  God,  that  ever  he  created  me,  ; 

Dexter; 


6/\.        A  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JUions  mthffirits,  dec. 

Dexter Even  thiis,  do  they  feek^continuaUj  to  enter  into  the    VPeak^ji  veffel :  of  envj,  not 

totri^mfh;  for  thej  kftow  thej  Jhalln>t :  but  they  hinder  the  time  with  man  ^   wherein   they  may 
offend  his  coitfcicnce. 

£•  K-  I  hear  howling  and  lamenting. 

T  E  K  Dexter Such  ore  thofe  of  whom  theu  feekfji  aid  and   comfort:    7'hofe  that  appear  unto 

'  thee,  have  [o'ight  thy  f$ii/;   Jrtd  the  fruit  of  tbemy  is  arcordingto  their  deftrulf  ion.        Believe  them 

not.       It  lif>iid  before.      Thou  dealefi  with  devils.     H'hat  reward  Jhall  he  reap,  that  fighteth  a- 
gainj}  the  Highejl  t    Or  ta\e'th  part  with  fuch  as  are  banijhed  from  Kighteoufneff'e  /     Much  nfore 

Jhall  hts  pMiil^ment  he,  which  feekfth  help  of  thofef  hat   are  difhonoured.       For  dijhonour 

to  imperfedi.rt,  and ii become  a  monfler for  dejlruUion. 

Jt  is  written  ....   Nothingcanjiand before  the  Lord,  thitt  is  tmperfeCf ;  M'<ch  more  that   iwper- 
feVtion  weakened, which  ohejeth  the  imperfe&.     Leave,  f^r  the  kingdom  of  Ktghteoufneffe  is  at  handy    I 
And  thou  mu(i  vow.      Hear  the  Lord,     That  thy  fms  may  be  forgiven  thee  :   for  the  Prophefies  of    \ 
the  Lord  are  not  uttered  to  the  world,  with  the  feales  of  the  wicked.       Therefore  become  holy,  that 
ihoji  niayefl  augment  the  benefit  of  God  bejiowed  amongjf  you;  and  render  it  to   the  world,  as  the 
rifffjge   of  truth  ,  with  thanksgiving.  Meum  eft  paiica  dicere. 

A.  Sed  quis  fis,  Nefcimus,  an  non  idem  Naluage,  qui  nobifcum  prius  egifti  hodie  ? 
■  Nal 7  am. 

E.  K.  Why  call  you  thofe  Devils,  with  whom  I  deal  ,•  not  offending  my 
confciencc,  but  mtcnding  to  do  good  to  my  fclf  and  my  neighbours  ?  if 
you  be  of  God,  where  is  the  fruit  of  your  dcdrinc  ?  <stcn 

Nal If  they  were  not  Devils  and  enemies  of  truthy  they   would  praife  and  honour  God  in 

bis  Mtffengers  of  truth.     But  becaufe  thef.'  Anions  are  true,  and  the  truth  of  them  jhall  be  the  de- 

^irulUon  0^  their  kjngdom  ;  Therefore  devilijhly  and  enviotifly  they  refiji  the  will  of  God^        Deny 

'  Devils.  _      j^ff  the  power  ',  Blafpheming  his  truth,  a»d  infe£iing  his  veffels. 

This  Doft  ine  j^  ^^^^  Voclrine  there  is  nothing  taught  but  the  jiate  of  the  world,  here^  and  to  come.  The  prs' 
w^at  It  teac  -  ^j-^^^  ^jr  f /„,^^  ^uj,  xhe  kjiitting  Up  of  God  his  myfteries,  opened  from  time  to  time,to  thofe  that  art 
his  fancfified  :  as  teftimonies  in  the  Creation  and  Operation  of  his  Creatures;  whereof  this  do- 
cirine  is  a  part.  The  Prophets  in  their  times  were  not  ignorant  by  revelation  of  the  good 
will  of  their  Creator.  The  Apojlles  in  Chriji  his  Kingdom,  were  made  partakers  of  the  myjleries 
to  come,  of  the  ftate  of  mans  falvation  ;  and  endi>ig  of  this  combat,  which  is  in  that  day,  when  all 
Creatures  fhallreceive  their  reward.  The  Church  of  G  d  is  alwtyes  garnifhed  and  furnijhed  ' 
Ifith  ffiritual  Revelations  :  as  a  Manfion  or  Dwelling-place  of  the  Holy  Chojh 

Thefe  latter  dayes,  and  end  of  harveji  muft  have  alfo  Labourers  :     For  no   Age  paffeth  away^ 
but  through  the  hands  of  God,who  maketh  the  end  of  his  doings    known  to  the  World  :  To  the  endy   , 
the  W. rid  may  confent  unto  him  in  Glory.       So  that  this  DoCirine,  is  the  myfteries  of  the  word  of  \ 
God,  fealed  from  the  beginning,  now  delivered  unto  man,  for  that  Reformation  which  muft  be  in 
Reformation.     One  unity  cftahliftied  unto  the  end.       The  very  part  0/ that  Circle,  w;bifi  comprehendeth  the 
Note    this       iijiieries  of  the  Highefi,  in  his  Prophets,  Apoftles,  and  Minifters  yet  to  come,  which  are  alive, 
*""^'^^*  and  Jhall  bear  witneffe  of  eternal  Comfort. 

The  fruit  of  our  DoUrine  is,  that  God  IJjould  be  praifed.  For  of  our  felves  we  feek.no  glory  : 
But  we  ferve  you  to  your  comfort,  teaching  you  the  will  of  God,  in  the  fe  If  fume  Chriit,  that  was  crw  I 
cified  ;  fold  and  died  m  the  Patriarchs,  and  publifhed  to  the  JForld  by  his  Difcip  'es,  and  is  how 
taught  unto  you,  in  the  remiffion  of  fins  ... .  grcareft  in  the  World,  for  the  end  of  all  things. 
The  very  k.^y  and  entrance  into  the  fecret  my\ieries  of  God,  (  in  refpecf  of  his  determination  on 
earth  )  bringing  with  it  reward  in  the  end  of  eternal  glory,  which  is  the  greatefi  Treafure.  Thofe 
that  tempt  thee,  do  it  in  refpeS  of  the  fear  they  have  of  the  power  tf  God,  fpringing  in  thee. 

Let  this  fuffice.     The  JForld  is  vain  in  refpe^i  of  eternal  joyes.      Heaven  and  Earth pajfeth  H' 
way:  The  reward  of  the  Righteous  endureth. 

E.K. 

Nal fi'hat  do  you  fee  imperfect,  in  all  that  hath  been  delivered  ? 

h, 

Nal Tou  have  49  Tables  :  In  thofe  Tables  are  contained  the  myflical  and  holy  voices  of  the  f 

Ange/s  :  dignified:   and  in  ftate  difglorified  and  drent  in  confufion  :  which  pierceth  Heaven,  and 
t  fr  •  r     look/th  into  the  Center  of  the  Earth  :  t^f  jifrj  language   and  fpeech  of  Children   and  Innocent  Sy 
to  C^acZi'en.  f'l^h  as  niagnifie  the  name  of  God,  and  are  pure. 

f,  Afulu  11.       n'herem,  the  Apoftles  underftood  the  difftife  found  of  the  World,  imperfe&ed  for  mans 
dixu  banc  Itn-  traufgreffim.       1  hefe  Tables  are  to  be  written,  not  by  man,  but  by  the  finger  of  her  which  is  mo- 
g«4m  riin^'Mfn  ji^gj.  (f)  y^j-fue  ^  u.  Mddimi  faid her  mother  would  write  them.  An.  1583.3   Wherein  the  whole 
imffe  revela-    j^^^jj^  ^  {^  jj^jf,  incredible  )  all  Creatures,  and  in  all  kinds,are  niinibred,  in  being,and  multitude*  I 
Let  thefe  two  1^^-'^  me -'fire  and  proportion  of  that  fubftance,  which  is  'Iranfitory,  and  Jhall  wax  old.  ' 

places  be  re-        Thtfe  things  and  mylitries  are  your  parts,  and  portions  fealed,  as  well  by  your  own  knowledge, 
«onciled.         as  the  fruit  of  your  Interccfllon. 

the 


Jtruel^elation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBions  mth  fpirits.  Sec;        6^ 

The  knowledge  of  Gods  Creatures. 

Vnto  we  tire  de/ivered  five  parts  of  a  tinte :  iVherein  I  will  open,  teach  ,  and  uncover  the  fecrets  F've  parts  of  a 
of  that  fpcechy  that  holy  wylierie.    Tv  the  intent  f^f  C  A  B  A  L  A  0/  N  A  T  U  R.  E,  in  voyce  ,^ub-  '""=• 
(tance  of  bodie,  andweafure  in  all  parts  may  he  kjiown  For  there  is  nothing  fecrtt  ,  h't  it  Ihall 

be  revealed,  and  the  [on  of  GOD  fl^all  be  kj'own  in  POWER,  and  ciUbliili  a  Kingdom  with 
righteoiifntfle  in  the  earth,  and  then  cometh  the  end.  .  , 

For  the  earth  mult  come  under  fubjeclion  ,  and  muii  be  made  pure.    That  death  nxay  he  fwal-  R'^ntim   CM' 
lowed  in  his  own  Kingdom^  and  the  eneyny  of  r'gbteo'fneffe  fi^ide  no  habit  at  im.   7he  word  of  God  ^ ;,- j'' /«' w"'™  "« 
dureth  for  ever.        His  promifes  are  ']ud,       H's  fpirtt   is  truth.        His  judgements  infcrutable,""*' 
hirnfelf  Vniverfall.       He  it  is  of  whom  you  labour.       The  promifes  of  God  in  this  earthly  Noble 
manfhall  be  fulfilled.     Salomon  vfed  the  places  of  honour ,  and  waf  exalted. 

Thus  fayeth  the  Lord. 

Ihave  fealed  him  again(l  iarreij  and  have  made  his  feat  open.  Let  him  therefore  arife  up, 
tbJt  the  people  may  fee  him.  For  mortal  men  have  places  of  honour,  and  in  t-'eir  own  Courts ,  they 
coine  to  oe  exalted :  H-'h''  is  he  that  made  the  earth,  and  dignified  him  with  a  living  Soul  ?  Even  he  it 
is  th-it  exilteth,  and  in  whofe  hands  the  Kingdoms  of  the  earth  are  fttled. 

Behold,  the  hfth  time  (hall  come,  Qin  refpe&  of  the  parts  of  time')  and  it  is  the  day  ,  that  hath 
been  promifed.       Then  fiall  your  eyes  be  of  en.        Then  fhali  you  fee- 

A  voyce.   Stay  there,.,. „ 

Nal.   /  obey. 

E.  K.  Now  I  fee  him  paffe'away  over  thcChriftallinc  Tabic  ,  which  U 
round  hke  a  Care,  wheel,  having  a  great  knop  in  rhe  middle. 

A.  As  concerning  our  ordering  of  the  Table  ,  and  the  reft  of  the  furniture,we  are  defirous 
to  know,  what  is  no'v  to  be  done  :  feing,  now  we  are  come  to  th£  end  of  this  iiril  journey. 

A  voyce.  Be  it  thy  charge.   1  will  put  to  my  hand. 

A.  Mean  you  it  to  be  my  charge  to  order  thefe  things,  as  my  imagination  fhall  be  in/lruftedj 
by  God  his  favour. 

A  voyce.  It  n  fo  faid  before.  " 

A*  Gloria,  Honour,  &  gratianim  aftioDeo  omnipotenti  Deo  noftro  Domino  &  Patri 
Noltro  :  nunc,  &  in  fempicema  feculo'runi  Ucula.       Amen, 


Tueild^y,  February  I  S.  a  Meredie  hora  ^.         Lasko.  Stylo  veteri,     /?/?  28. ...» 

Die  jit  lo  novo. 

A.  After   fome  prayers  made ,  £.  K,  faw  fas  he  thought  J  Nalvage  ftanding  at  my  left 
hand. 

A.  In  nomine  Jefu  Chrifti  Redemptoris  noftri,  Eftis  vos  Nalvage  ? 
Nal.    Tu  diris. 

E.  K-  The  lower  part  of  him  is  in  a  Cloud  :  but  all  his  upper  part  is  out,he 
hath  a  thing  like  a  Pall  hanging  down  bchindc  him  from  his  head  j He  hath 
hke  a  round-  . .  ,of  boanc  in  his  hand,  he  fcemeth  to  be  as  farre  as  thd 
Church,  And  I  Ice  him,  as  well  winking  as  dirc<5tmg  my  open  fight  on 
him. 

Nal.  iVbat  is  it  you  require  ?  .        , 

A.  The  expolition  of  the  time  delivered  to  you  in  five  parts.  ^  P  j^^py^, 

Nal,  T^eadit.  ^^  cedente. 

A.  I  read,  and  when  I  came  to  the  place ,  that  death  may  be  fwallowed,  &c^  Nalvagf  faid 
as  followcth. 

Nal.   That  it  the  la^Canqueft,       go  forward. 

A.   In  reading?  ^ 

Nal.  /.  '1| 

A.  I  read  to  the  end. 

Nal.  The  finger  of  the  highefl  perufeth  nature  among (l  you  by  himfelf ,  and  in  her  own  motion. 
Through  which  action  things  become^  that  were  not  (by  Gener  ition  :  )  And  in  the  fame  time  vanijhy 
^  tbovgb  they  were  not  Qjy  corruptin.')    A  year  it  is  j       Wherein  nature  lookfth  with  many  eyes 

through dwelling  places  :  unto  fome  as  a  Nurfe:  and  to  the  refl  M  a  llep-mother.      And  fo  it  is 

fueam  in  the  Scriptures.  F^r,  a  time  is  an  year  ,  purpofed  by  determination  in  the  judgement 
*^f  God;  which  is  not  ki\own  to  7nan  3  how  ,  or  when  it  Jha  II  happen.  Another  year  is  a  time, 
fliablijhed,  and  prefently  delivered,  as  the  prefcnt  judgement  of  Cod.  Thii  is  that  t  fpeak.  of.  A 
fime  is  unjear.      The  -farts  are  kjiownamongil  jou.  \ 

K  E.  K.  I 


66      A  true l^tlation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBionsmth/firits^d^c. 
£.  K-  J  never  heard  any  fpeak  fo  leifurcly- 

Nal.    Eoic  looK^ojourmderlianding.        I  fpeak^of  two  years.     One  appointed h:  the  judgement 

attd  ddermhiition  of  God  to  come^arJ  mihjiown  to  man.        The  other  the  time  of  the  judgement  of 

God  (^und  before  determined)  now  prefettt :  Notwithjianding)  before  determined.       There  is  dif- 

fercnce  between  an  year  myiiically  promifed^andunkjiown  :  and  the  time  that  is  myilically  fromfed 

E  K  He  freak-  an-l  k>^<,v;»..       Annus  myfticu*  fumitur  diipliciter  :  Unus,  qui  eft  Tenipus  cocniciim  Deo,&:  ho- 

ethal3nguj{;eniininonrevcIatimi:  Tempus  ,  hoc  dicitur  ,  apuJ  Deiim.     Annumnos  illud  computanms. 

to  me   ua-     Aliiid  ell  pr;ifiiiiciini,cognitum  Deo  &  Angelis,  &  revelatum  homini :  &  Aiinus  eft    prxfens, 

foX"h  TL  T^-  ^^'[;i  ^^'O-r  I  fpea\  of 

what  on  one  A-   What  are  your  parts  of  that  year  >  ,   .        .    .„  ,.       .         •    •   ^,    .„ 

fide.  Nal.  Mirch,  April,  M'yjme,  July,   Angujl In illo  autem  die ,  invenictis  Chnftum. 

The  words  of  this  DoBrine  muii  agree,  and  times. 

E.  K    When  come  you  with  the  rell  of  your  word*  ? 

Nal.  As  it  is  given  me,fo  I  give  it  unto  you. 

A  gr  atuiiparience. 

fA    He  was  thus  interrupted  by  E.  K.]    — "  Mufl  end  their  courfein  thepromifc  of  God: 

"  f  In]  Tbefe  weeks  are  the  fruits  of  my  labour  to  be  known, For  I  nuift  unfold  unto  you,and 

Cahali.rifal     cj  j^^^^^  j]_^  fccrets  of  this  myftical  ,  and  Delivered  fpeech  :  Whereby  you  may  talk   in  mortal 

the^  ecilvin     "  founds  with  fuch  as  are  immoi  tal:  And  you  may  truely  know  the  nature,  and  ufe  of  God  his 

'"g-  jj  ^^  eatures.    T  herefore,be  dilii^ent  in  hearins,and  Receiving.    For  the  courfc  of  man  iscon- 

*'  crary  :  But  the  determination  of  God  moft  certain. 

You  are  anfwered. 

Mean  you  thefe  Lenten  weeks,  or  the  weeks  of  all  the  fore-reherfed  nioneths  ? 

•   Of  my  whole  appointed  time. 

E.  K«  He  ftandeth  higher  up. 

Miy  we  (with  Ut  offence')  require  your at  all  times,  at  our  cafe  requireth  ? 

Nal.    lour  labour  is  my  readintffe. 

Tou  fee  I  have  an  Ague  :  /A  hat  is  your  counfel  therein  ? 

Nal.    I  have  to  counfel  you  (  from  God.  J 

A.  BlelTed  be  the  Fountain  of  counfel,  and  of  all  goodnefTe, 

E-  K.  He  iTiewcth  an  hou(c  '■>  and  fix ,  or  kvcn  on  the  top  of  it  with 
Torches :  Theyarehkcfhadows. 

In  the  name  of  God  what  may  this  mean  ? 

E.  K.  Thele  fliadows  go  up  and  down  the  fide  of  ihehoule  ,  thrufting 
their  Torches  into  the  fides  of  it.  The  houfc  is  Hke  this  very  houle.  They 
go  round  about  the  houfe.  There  arc  eight  of  them.  They  have  claws 
hkc  Eagles.  Whcnthey  fit, they  are  hke  ApcSc  They  fct  a  fire  on  it,  and 
it  burnah  mightily  j  Now  your  wife  runneth  out,  and  feeraeth  to  leap  ovet 
the  Galery  rayl,  and  to  ly  as  dead-  And  now  come  you  out  of  door,  and  the 
Children  itandin  the  way  toward  the  Church.  And  you  come  by  the 
ycrn  doer;  and  kneel,  and  knock  your  hand  on  the  earth.  They  tske 
up  your  w.fe.  her  head  waggleih  thii.  way  and  that  way.  You  look  up  to 
heaven  llill,  and  kneel  upon  one  of  your  knees.  The  flone  houle  cjuiver- 
eth  an  \  quaketh^and  all  thcroof  of  the  houfe  lalleth  into  the  houfe ,  e^^own 
upon  the Chcfts,  Andonct)f  thefe  baggige  things  laughcth-  The  houfe 
burneihallolF-  Your  wife  is  dead,  all  het  face  is  bartered-  Tlie  right 
fideclf  her face,'her  teeth  and  all  is  bartered-  She  is  barc-lcggcd,  (he  bath 
awhitc  Peticoteon.      Now  the  apparition  is  all  gone- 

cMark  feemtch  to  bepuUcd  ouiof  a  pool  of  watcr,half  alive  , and  half 
dead,  her  hair  hanging  aboLir  her  cars-      They  hold  her  up-       Now  they 
carry  her  out  at  the  Gaic.     You  feem  to  runne  in  the  field*,  and  three,    or  i 
four  men  ifter  you-     You  run  through  waters-    All  diiappeareth,  And  now" 
Nalva^e  appeareth  again-    He  (ecmcth  to  have  wept- 

Nal. .....Coi 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBions  mth  fpirits,  (5cc#        6j 

Nal •  God  givethygu  warning  that  yon  may  efchue  them. 

A.   And  how  fhall  1  efchue  them  ? 

Jsjal I  l^hus  fajeth  the  Lord.         Behold,  I  have  fealed  thee  for  my  f elf  :  for  my  peoJ>le,and  for 

my  fervant.  T'herefore  Jha/t  thou  not  perifh  j  No,  not  the  leaji  hair  of  thy  hodie.  Fear  not  ,  be 
iironl  in  faith.  For  I  come  Jhortly.  Hearkjn  therefore  to  my  voyce,  I  fay  ,  therefore  hearken  to 
my  voyce  :  For  the  fpirits  of  wick^edneffe,  and  confufionhave  rifen  up  againji  thee :  If  therefore  they 
prevail  agfinfl  my  purpofes  ;  Ihenjhall  it  be  no  world  :  Neither  are  there  any  heavens.  But, 
this  plif<^^  ^  ""^  /"''  ^^^^  iy^h  'f  ^^^«  wilt,  be  it  unto  thee.  I  will  feal  dejirvUion,  both  for  a  time 
and  for  ever.  Be  mighty  therefore  tn  me..  ^^  All  the  earth  rageth  in  wick^dneffe.  And  finne 
Cmelleth  thee  ready  now  to  creep  out  of  his  hole.  If  thou  move  thy  feat,  it  Jhall  be  jvore  acceptable. 
For  even  tbif  yearjhalt  thou  fee  the  beginning  of  many  troubles  :  And  the  entrance  of  thii  LASKOj 
into  the  bloudy  fervice  of  the  world. 

E.  K.    He  feemech  to  fpic  fire,  and  fo  vanifli  away^ 

O  Jefu  Chrift,  we  have  committed  our  felves  into  thy  hand ;  and  do  fiibmit  our  wills  to 
thy  goveinment.  What  fliould  this  mean  of  terrible  deftruftion  threatned  to  my  wife  and 
maiden  ?  And  as  it  were  frenzie^  to  light  on  rtie  fdr  forrow.  Thcfe  things  cannoc  well 
agree  with  our  former  aflured  proteftion. 

£.  K.  /fee a  little  wench  on  the  bench, all  in  white,  fhcfayech. 

......  How  do  you  fir  ?   ■..,.  [making  cur  fie  to  A.] 

A.  Better  it  is  known  to  you  then  to  my  felf ,  how  I  dd. 

Sir,  I  havebeen* land,atyour  houfe,where  they  are  all  welt. 

A.  Thanked  be  God. 

Amen...;  The  ^eenfaid:  She  was  for ry  that  fhe  had  lofl  her  Philofoper.        tut  the  Laid 

"treafurer  anfwered  :  He  will  come  home  Jhortly,  a  begging  to  you. 

qiey  were  black..  Sir,  Herry  Sidney  died  upon  Wcdnefday  laft.  A.  Nete,  at  Prague,  Aug.  24. 
A  privy  enemy  of  yours.  1  un<k.(lood  ih.zSh  a^nry 

^        J  1      1      l;„  c r  I  •  cc  •  „J„  Sidney  WIS  not  dead  in  Febru- 

I  e^er  took   him  for  one  of  my  chief  friends.  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^^^  „^  „„,  i„  May 

......  But  thii  it  it :  Iruely,  none  can  turn  the  ^eens  heart  from  you.  laft  :  Theretee  this    muft  be 

I  could  not  come  into  your  Studie  :  The  ^ween  hath  eaufed  it  to  be  fealed  confidered ,  Doftor  Haget  his 

wp.     lou  have  been  ufed  to  good  Cities :  It  were  good  ,  yen  did  confider  '°"  '°''^  ""^*       '^^^  "'*y  *}^° 

it.     Little  words  are  of  great  matter.  mark  ho^v  the  Devi!   «  this  CRACOVJA.  ' 

Tin.  r  ij  -n.  r      t  rir^   n-.  time  did  mil- inform  £.  K.  and 

A.  Where,  I  pray,  would  you  wiOi  me  to  fettle  my  felf  firft?  {^h  is  poflible  that  this  being 

......  i^ty  mother  would  give  you  counfel  to  dwell  at  LAS  CO,  a  lye,  was  his. 

A.  Do  you  diflent  from  your  mother  ? 

••••«•  •'• 

A.  Upon  what. 

......Jefu,  you  think,  that  I  am  an  unwife  maiden.       The  Devil  bringeth  the  found  of  my  motith     ^^^  ,^. 

to  thy  ears,    E.K.   For  I  faidC  K  A  C  O  V  I  A,  and  he  fpa^e  I  A  S  CO.  envy  &  power 

A.  Scing  your  mother  would  wilh  rae  to  dwell  at  C  R  A  G  O  V  I  A,  at  what  other  place  of  thcDevU. 
would  you  wift  me  to  dwell  ? 

,  Lrw  ante  faciem,Tenebr£  poji  tergum. 

6,  K.  Now  /feel  a  huffing  thing  go  from  my  head- 

I  pray  you  be  not  offended  with  my  fimpltcity  :  My  mother  and   I  am  all  one.         In  w  ^TheCancord 

no  difcord :  1  prij.y  you  bear  with  me,  if  1  fay,  1  be  the  Concord  of  time.         7hefe  are  my  words,  of  ""*• 
My  mother  would  have  you  dwell  <zt  C  R  A  G  O  V  I  A.        And  Iconfent  unto  it.       Let  them 
that  be  wife  underjiand.     Alwayes  pray  that  you  may  hear  truely,  and  receive  faithfiiUy. 

A.  May  I  before!  go  any  further  demand  if  you  heMadimi  ? 

I  amfo.  Sir. 

A.  As  concerning  this  terrible  Vifion  here  Ihewed,  whac  ,  is  either  the  intent ,  or  verity 
of  it  ? 

Mad.  Sir,willit  pleafeyouto  hear  me? 

A.  The  verity  is  moft  acceptable  to  me  alwayes.  r  "wrf  Anno 

Mai I  think,your  book.  Uith,    tbif  man  hit  w.ty  is  prepared,  &c.  lySj.  jun.itf. 

A.  I  trow,  the  words  are,  His  feat  is  made  open,  or  made  manifeft.  Supers  ante  dua 

Mad Ititfo.     Bear  with  we,  /  thinks,  it  isfo.  ^  f"^''*- 

A.  What  will  you  fay  thereof  > 

Mad. .;....  And  upon  earth  Princes  have  h  .  ..in  their  own  Courts.  I  remember.  He  was  feal- 
ed at  Mortlakc.  Contra  omne  malum.  Then  cannot  the  King  of  Poland,  nor  the  Chancelor, 
prevail  againji  him.     Yet  Vendiderunt  animam  ejus. 

^     A.    Lord  be  merciful  unto  . .  . ;  What  Trayterous  dealing  ?  I  befeech  you  to  fay  .  .  .  e. 
Ml  that  cafe  ;    He  is  our  great  friend,  and  fer  the  fervice  of  God  furthering. 

K  2  Mad ToH 


f 


'  '       '  —  ■■■"■'■■■  9  — 

6S      A  true  Relation  of  D.  Dee  his  jBtons  mthjpirits,  6c c. 

Mad Tou  met  a  man  by  the  way  :  He   is  an    Irifh  man-   (^  But  as  .. .  me,  he  faid  he  was 

a  French  >}un^  I  heard  the  King,  when.  ..  .  him  to  go  into   England.    But  he   could  not  poifon 
him  there  .  .  .  Therefore  he  followed  him,  all  the  way.     Bat  if  he  return  again  :  They  fay,  fVe  ypill 
CoBfpJricy      exalt  him.         But  fend  thou  thy  Army,  and  we  will  fend  him.      Wherefore  hath  the  King  abfented 
oithcK.ot"      himfelf,  but  to  betray  hn  Kingdom^   fruely,   I  can  tell  no  other  caufe. 

I'ol.  wih  the  (j5,/j,  i^gti,^^  j-^,^^1^  ^-fi,,^  t'^^p.  feyp  ^ayes,  after  he  ...  •  calleth  it  J  a  little  talk,,  Lee  him  go 

Afl.         ^°  Craco\  ia  ....  himfelf  as  David  did  before  Saul ;     It  may  be  the  people  will  like  well  of  him. 
li/Jh,  Ti'JhyTimor  innatus,  will  never  prevail.       £^  K,   She  faith  fo^tUrnmg  hcr  head 

Although  he  hate  him,  he  cannot  hurt  him,  i i_  ,^      ^    ►U^-   i~     i  t 

Sir,  if  yon   tarry  here,  you  Will  have  great  DECk  CO  one  that  Ipakc  CO  hcF. 

grief  in  this  houfe. 

A.  How  long  (  I  pray  you  )  would  you  wifli  me,   to  tarry  here  .•  or  how  foon  to  be  rid 
hence  ? 

Mad ;.  Hark,...  He,£..K.marvelkthwhat  Iwillfaynow. 

E-K-  Sol  did  indeed. 

Mad The  Phyfitian  faith,  infededair  it  to  he  avoided  in  haft,      tj^iany  Princes  fhallbg 

acquainted  with  you,  and  Learned  men.  T'he  good  are  oftentimes  jiirred  up  to  rffend  God,  whofe 
cffenes  ar e  both  wilful  and  rajh  :  For  temptation  ii  a  Touchjione,  and  it  one  of  the  blacky  fellows 
chiefejiweapoHs. 

A.   I  befecch  you,  to  fay  fomewhac  of  the  time  of  our  going  hence. 

Mad Ti^Jh,  I  pray  you.  Go  hence  a$  foon  as  you  may. 

A.  To  Cracovia,  you  mean. 

Mad I....  I  will  n'.w  and  then  vifit  you  there :    And  will  become  friend  with  jou^  E.K, 

Mow  :  for  you  are  become  a  good  man.  . 

A.    As  concerning  that  terrible  fiiew,  what  can  you  fay  of  it  ? 

Mad Js  a  warning  to  bewarethat,  that  Jhould  be.       Thii  is  the  laftS^ear* 

A.  But,  if  I  go  to  Cracovia,  no  fuch  thing  (hall  happen,  I  truft. 

Mad S  ,  Sir.    Therefore,  This  is  your  warning. 

A.  Is  it  nor,  then,  the  will  of  God,  that  1  fliall  fet  up  the  Table  here,  as  you  fee,  we  have 
prepared. 

Mad.  ......Be  contented.      T'hlf  Pfildernejfe,  is  not  40  years.       My  Mother  faith,  It  muft  not 

be  here  ;  yet  at  your  requeft,  it  may  be. 

€.  K-  How  can  tliat  be  ? 

A.    At  mans  commandment,  the  Sun  can  ftand. 

Mad He  faith  true,  Believe  him Therefore  I  will  not  urge  any  thing  herein,but  de- 
fer till  we  come  to  Cracovia. 

A.  At  Cracovia,  fhall  I  fet  it  up  ?  And  fhal\  I  require  Ternns  houfe  there  ?  Or  what  houfc 
clfe,  is,  in  God  his  determination,  for  me  and  mine  ? 

^s  w'/e  as  I  am,  I  cannot  tell,  what, yet,  to  fay.         It  is  the  Town,   inhere  the  Sabbath 

day  jhall  he  celebrated. 

A.   But  now,  as  concerning  the  houfe.  What  is  your  word  ? 

Mad Touwillnot  be  defiitute  of  an  hovfe.       Will  yon  believe  me  ;  For  I  am  your  true 

friend  MADI  MI.        Here  (hall  be  the  end  of  your  turmoil.      Be  of  goed  cheare. 

^.  Did  you  not  will  us  to  have  my  cheft  from  Tom  before  we  go  ? 

Mad.  ......  I,  when  theblack^m  . .  .  hath  called  home  his  waters. 

A.  Aflbon  as  .  . .  .nhave  it  fromTo>-«  hither,  then  we  are  to  be  going. 

E.  K-  How  will  my  Lord  agree  to  this  ? 

Mad Nowyou  are  become  a  new  man,  both  we  may  dwell  in  one  houje.         Sir,  I  promife 

you  of  my  credit,yeu  Jhall  be  to  learn  nothing  of  thefe  things  by  Auguft. 

A.  By  A'guji  next  ? 

Mad Xea  ...  Next. 

A.  Perhaps  my  Lord  his  furniture  of  money  will  not  be  fuch,  as  to  ferve  for  our  carnat^c 
anew,  &-c.  Beiides  that,  1  would  wilh  Ke^mark.  to  be  redeemed  ,  before  he  /hould  come  ro 
Crac.vii   :  Perhaps  then  with  the  people,  his  credit  would  be  greater. 

Mad Thofe  that  become  Kings,  care  nothing  for  Farm-ktifes. 

A.  I  would  that  needleflecoftj  here  beftowed,  had  beenfaved;  or  that  you  had  told  u: 
,,^  this  fooner. 

Mad Silence  now,  is  my  beji  anfwer. 

A.   Do  you  know,  (  O  Lord,  what  fay  1  >  )  Have  we  had  any  name  of    NALV  AGF 
heretofore  m  our  Tables  or  Books  exprefl"ed  >  i 

_j^^^-    H' hat  have  you  written,  that   have  you  written.  He   is  a.  near  kinfmattto 

NaWage.         ^J^other.        We  call  him,  with uf,¥ugz  tcirei\t'n[n\. 

A.  VVe  befeech  God,  that  all  intemicdling,  and  faucinerTe  of  the  wicked  in  thefe  Aftions 
may  ceale.       You  know  how  one  clawed  him,  Jiere,  on  the  head,  as  with  Eagles  claws. 

Mad. 


1 


^^  true  Relation  ofD^,  Dee  his  JBkns  mth  fpirits,  &€•       6c) 


Mad He  may  rejoyce^  Xkey  clawed  fiot  kis  foul.        Ton  are  content  to  let  me  go^ 

E-  K.  Shcgocthaway  lomewhat  bigger^  and  in  a  longGviwn- 

A.   Soli  Deo  Gloria.     Amen. 


Friday^  Febrtiar.  21.  i  Meridiem    Lasko.  Martii  2.  Stylo  novo. 

A.  As  I  had  talked  of  Af/zi/wi,  and /L.  to  E.  K.  about  Treafure  hid  in  E«g/<z;;«;  :   and  I 
was  defiioiis  to  havefonie  advertifementby  Madimiy  (he  appeared. 
Mad.  ......  /  answer  your  inward  man.    I  am  come  again. 

E.  K-  She  is  bkaer  than  ilie  was- 

Mad 1  am  a  little  firovn. 

A.  As  concerning  a  medicine  for  my  Ague,  I  would  gladly  .;  .  And  as  concerning  the 
wife  of  our  dear  friend,  the  Lor  .  .  . 

Mad Iprayyou,hear  witbmeat  this  time  :  Jamas  willing  to  anfwer  you  (when  li^ht, 

cometh  again  )  as  you  to  ask.  >»f  •  T^ou  may  confider  of  tnany  things^  I  can  anfwer  them  briefly. 
Such  bleffing  as  my  Mother  bejhwetb  on  me,  fuch  I  give  you, 

E.  K  Shcfmilcth. 

A,  God  grant  that  his  good  Creatures  mayfmileon  me. 

Mad IVhen  youk^iow  me  welly  you  will  find,  I  have  been  very  charitable. 

'  E.  K  She  gocthaway  naked  ;  her  body  being  befprenc  with  blood  j  ac 
the  ieaft  that  fide  of  her  toward  £  •^'• 

A.  Laudetur  Deus  Trinus  &  unus,  nunc  &:  in  fempiterna  feculorum  fecula.     A»ten, 


Saturday^  Fthruarii  22.  1584.  ante  meridiem.  Lasko.  [  Martii  3.  Stylo  mvo. 
A.  The  queiftions  needful  to  be  required  of  Madimi. 

1.  Good  counfel  for  my  health  recovering,  and  confirming. 

2.  If  the  Pedeftal  (  for  the  holy  Table  )  being  here  made  ,  fliall  be  carryed  with  us  to 
Cracow  J  rather  than  to  make  a  new  there  :  both  to  fave  time,  and  to  have  our  doings  the 
more  fecret? 

3.  What  is  your  knowledge  and  judgement  of  ^.  L.  his  wife,  in  refpeft  of  her  life  paft 
prcfcnt,  and  to  come  ;  for  we  doubt  flie  is  not  our  found  friend? 

4.  It  is  our  very  eaineft  defire,  that  the  Danifh  Treafurer  in  England,  in  the  ten  place? 
(feifedonby  E.  K)  might  be  brought  hither,   very  fpeedily  :  whereby  A.L-  might  vc~ 
6.ttmKeyfmarh^znd.Las\p\zi\dSymoTg3.gcd  :  and  alfo  pay   his  debts, in  Cracow,  and  about 
Cracow, 

For,  clfe,  neither  can  he  come  with  any  credit,  to  Cracow,  (  as  he  is  willed  )  neither  can 
he  come  to  us,  there,  focommodiouflyj  and  oft,  as  our  conferences  may  be  requifit.  And 
thirdly,  the  day  of  Keyfmark^  forfeiting  (  without  the  Emperour  his  favourable  help  )  draweth 
nigh  :  as  in  April  at  St.  George  his  Day  next. 

A,  And  by  your  fpeech  of  EHg//z«<i,yougivemeoccafionto  enquire  whether  her  Majefty 
doth  caufe  my  rents  to  be  received,  by  my  Deputy  afligned  or  no? 

Whether  her  Majefty,  or  the  Council,  do  intend  to  fend  for  me  again,  into  England 
or  no? 

And  as  concerning  the  red  p  . .  .  .which  E.  K.  found  with  the  book  iir  England,  what  it  is : 
And  what  is  the  beft  ufe  of  It,  and  how  that  ufe  is  to  be  praftifed  or  performed? 

A.  after  thefe  Queltions  written,  and  a  little  our  praying  to  God  for  his  light,  verity,  and 
help,  and  to  fend  Madami,  according  as  flie  ivilled  me  to  note  many  things,for  that  (he  could 
anfwer  them  briefly  :  we  ufed  filence  a  while  ;  .  . .  ath  /he  appeared  on  my  right  hand  be- 
tween me  and  E.  iC. 

Blejfcd  be  his  name  that  in  truth,  and  for  the  truth,  fendeth  his  Mmijlers  to  in(lrucl   them 

that  love  Truth Even  fo  Be  not  pierced  too  much  with  fight  of  me.     [  toE,  K.  for  he 

looked  mervalloufly  earneftlyon  her. 3 

E.  K.  She Icetneth  more  bright  than  (lie  was.    And  to.  • .  andcoftand 

in  a  more  bright  place- 
Mad All  honour  be  to  him  that  livetb  intieavenand  inEarth,and  ismighty  in  all  tlaces: 

Amen. 

I lour  health. 

E-K-  Now  the  is  gone  to  the  place  on  the  Culliions  on  the  bench, where 
the  flood  ycfterday.     5he  doth  now  as  young  children  do,  playing  with  her 

coats  i 


yo         A  trueKelation  of  D'.  Dee  his  Jettons  mth  fpirits,  &ic. 


Two  imme- 
diate powers. 


Cncovia. 


Riches. 


coats .  and  at  Icnoch  ficreth  down  on  the  Culliions. 

Mad.  ......  Ev:n  as  spiritual  ani  dignified  ilhminatio'n  ,  from  afcenfion,  ani  ly  defcenditig, 

work^the  will  of  God,  d  terniined  in  all  Creatures-,  diver  fly,   according  to  the  meafured  purpofe  f 
the  Hi^heli,  in  difperjing  hif  will  upon  and  into  every  one,  particularly  ;    whereby  font e  become  wife,   < 
one  in  thii,  another  in  that  'legree  ;  other  fome  mighty  in  workj,    whereby  health  and  help,  comfort 
and  joy,  tf  g'ven  to  thf  faithful :   Even  fo,  afcend/n^^,  doth   H'll   infeU,  fomettme  with  error,  and 
fonietnne  with  infirmities  :  So  that  from  Heaven  fpringeth  h:!alxh,  from  below  infirmities   of  body 
and  fo"l.      JVhfre'y  wt  fi>id  two  imnediatc powers, bring'ng  forth  ttvo prepertieSf  The  one  Comforty 
with  Joy  ;    "The  other  Infe£ficn  withforrow. 

hut  this  m.iy  be  cbjeded  :     Hath  it  not  been  feen,  that  the  wirhjed  cure  diftafes  ?  and  refiore 
health?    Whatfoever  is  of  death,  ii  forrow ;  which  is  the  ground  of  fpiritual  and  b  dily  infedion 
fo  that  evil  cannot  wor^gooi.     How  can  it  theref  re  be  thn  the  dead  revive,  or  re\tore  health  ? 
Ihe  cure  therefore  of  all  fpiritua!  infedion  (  I  mean  the  infedi-ns  of  fnchy  as  are  fpiritval  is  in  rf- 
fpecl  of  hps  weakjuffe,  and  not  of  hit  lirenj^rh  ;   Beraufe  Satan  it'^eding,  may  become  weah^  (  vhireby 
h?  rann:t  prevail')  and  fo  give  health,  by  reafon of  veal^neffe  :    Otherwife,  with  power,   bringing 
dvath  all  manner  of  wayes. 

A.    E.  K.  thought  a  thing,   whereunto  (he  anfwered .   .  and  he  fa'd  .  .   .  my  thought.- 
fheaiifvveied  ....  in  my  decree,   thoujjhts ....    known  to  me.  I,  than  an  .  .    ..  ihe  is  of 

Cod  and  in  God,  tha ....  the  thought  of  man. 

£•  2C,  She  •  •  •  1  hear  •  •  •  a  baz-  . .  earc. 

'thefe  two  immediate  and  fupernatural  properties  are  fo  dignified  in  Creation  and  'Deti-r" 

wination,  that  the  good  Ange  's  cannot  cure,  -r  heh  furh  infirmities,  as  are  brought  in  ly  the  fvbtile 
in^'e&ionofthewickfdthemfelves:  Vnleffe  in  body  the  immediate  power  of  the  fecond  Ferfon  in 
"Trinity  be  adjnyned  in  the  aid  and  cure  of  thf  infected b.dy ;  whi:h  is  the  true  PhyOtian.  And  JS 
he  tonk^upon  him  man  his  frailty,  fo  he  is  chief  Govervour  over  the  fame  in  all  degrees. 

If  the  f'ul  be  infeded,  the  Angels  have  tto  power  to  ..  .  it  or  ma\e  it  clean:  but  ly  the  will  of 
the  Fatherwhichis  the  Holy  Gho.i,  defcending  through  the  Angels  into  the  propriety  of  the  Chrth  : 
whertby  the  Vi^eafe  is  cured.  Therefore,  confidering,  thou  art  infeCted,  not  naturally,  but  by 
fpiritual  and  wick^ed  inflammation,  Jiirring  up  thy  body  vnto  in''ttlion.  We  that  are  g  od  Angelsy 
cannot  minifier  h  Ip  unltffe  we  feel  the  immediate  power  »f  him  which  is  the  fecnd,  a-d  the  water 
of  Life.  Notwithianding,  aswe  kjton'  hoiP  the  infection  grew,  either  locally  r  really  :  So  can 
wehnd  conrrary  places  and  things  for  comfort. 

IPhm  Herod  v  a  infetiedby  the  Devil  t'l  killvery  Chrili  the  Son  of  G  d;  His  p^'rpofe  was  not 
altered  by  contra  diaion  r?  the  Levi',  but  by  the  forekjiowltdge  of  God,  which  appointed  fgypt  for 
hisfafegi'ard.  So  it  isfaid  unto  thee.  It  is  tho'ght  good  thou  Jljou.dii  reli  at  CRACOVIA; 
for  it  is  aplacefanUified,  bothin  fore-dttermination,  andnow.  Therefore  life  the  Sab  ath,  and 
reli  from  labo'T  :  Reap  now,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  thy  labour  ;  Preffe  the  Vine,  that  thou  mayeii 
drink-,  and  It  comforted  :  fcr  theprnnifes  of  God,  are  not  in  vain  ;  Neither  are  the  Ihavens 
frritl  jfe.  For  as  it  isfaid,  Thou  arr  nor  bound,  but  f.r  thefervice  of  God  :  N  itherjialt  thoti 
be  enriched  by  Pnnces  :  but  fhalt  et-rich  them.  Flejh  may  fpeak^  vainly,  and  le  without  comfort : 
But  the  promifes  of  Gjd,  ce-ife  not,  neither  become  uncertain. 

This  year  to  come,  if  of  great  lluod-'Jed:  prepared  »to  flop  the  movth  of  the  Earth ^whi-h 
gapeth  f  r  fcrrow.  Therefore  thou  muji  be  feparared,  that  the  promifes  of  God  may  le  fulfilled  : 
vhich  Cometh  (  not  at  your  reijue',  'i-.t  at  h'.s  Veterm-nation  J  mo'i  alundantlj. 

Thf'e  B-  rd>  need  not.  The  paviment  Jlall  ftrve;  for  it  isneither  the  Earth,  nor  mans  h'tnds, 
(bit  the  Finger  of  him  that  liveth,  )  that  frcvokfth. 

Behold  ....  That  the  pover  of  G  d  might  be  k/tcwn,  therefore  be  hath  ch  fen  thofe  that  are  not 
regarded,  to  the  intent,  it  may  be f aid  :  Lo,  This  is  of  God.  ..  Haji  theref orfy  and  jiay  not^ 
for  thy  warning  is  great. 

Th.fe  that  are  wfe  (  to  fin")  in  thnr  flefl-ly  imaginations,  are  dei'eivers  of  themfehes :  Which 
with  us  are  not  to  be  accufed,  but  rarher  unknown.     For  the   Kingdom  of  Hfaven  is  divided 


ana 


naturally^ 


^.l: 


/S  Ciioifmon 
ipfius  PaUtinK 


from  Hell  :  and  thofe  that  are  of  Hell,  are  unknown  from  us.     For  as . 
know  not,  one  another,  fuch,  and fo  it  is  of  us. 

Sit  tibi  fatij  quod  illam  non  novimus,  neque  virtutem  ullam  defcendentem  ab  ilia  vidimus. 
Neither  is  the  power  of  God  in  him-,for  his  own  fakcbut  for  the  Spirit  that  God  hath  planted  in  him. 
F'"r  we  have  kjtorvnhim,  and  again  have  forgotten  him.  And  yet  we  underliand  him  But  (^  I 
teach  thee  a  Myflery  )  ly  irradiation  into  him  :  and  not  by  repexion  from  himfelf.  As  the  heavens 
fiy  from  the  j{ink.ofthe  infeded  powers,  even  fo,Jiy  thou, 

£•  K-  She  callethone,  who  is  now  come  here. 
E,  K    H:  feemeth  to  have  his  face  half 
Gan What  wilt  thou  with  wf^7  ijj^g  ^  ^3^^  ^^d  half  Hke  a  woman,  his 

ffhat  Wilt  thou  have  f  Ji       1    1     •  n  1       •  1    1     •  1 

body  being  ail  covered  with  hair,  rugged, 

E.   K.'lhlS 


Canijlay,     Canijlay. 


(oyf  true  Relation  ofjy.  Dee  his  J&tcns  mth  fpirits,  (5cc.       7 


E,  K.  3ladimii}na.kezh  her  Coates,  and  brufliech  her  Coatcs  with-  • . .  •  • 

Mad. Thus  fityeth  mj  M"ther.        Beware  of  wiUi;  hoftj,  and  raw  fruit :  the  one  clarified^ 

the  other  ripened  may  become  good.       'iho^e    that  k^ttow  not    wine  become  drunkjn^  but  to  fwh  as 
i^ow  it,  it  Iriiigeth  health-        I.ve7t  fo,  thit  Vo^rine.     For,  unto  hint  that  it  if  tajhd ,  being  ripe^ 

or or  becoviethcomfort^andthe  Kfjnf  a  pr But  unto  hint  that   tiijieth  it  wifd/j,    a>id...... 

Workfth  f.rrow.     Jour  kjiowled^e  is  not  to  hzst^but  to  learn  to......  So  that  you  may  be,'.oth  having 

and  /earned.        Small  are  the  "treafures  of  thit  worlds  in  refpe£i  of  the  wifdom  that  judgeth  N  J- 

TVKE-        For  unto  him  that  judgeth  tritely,  yphat  fecret  it  hidden  ?    Thofe  that  feek^  the  world 

fhall  be  contemned  of  it :  But  he  that  flieth  from  her,  Ihall  iife  her  as  a  flave^  or  as  the  feccnd  moth,  r 

doth  her  davghtcr.       Notwithjianding^of  my  felf^Iwill  be  more  appliable  unto  you  ,  then  yon  (hall 

le  followers  of  me.       For,  for  that  caufe  anil  become  childifh.       Therefore  ceafe  :  He  is  truely  vvfe.  coA  ' 

Wife,  that  fayeth,  God  kjioiveth  at  all  times  what  we  have  need  of.       Be  not  tempters.      Be  pati/nt.  his  Minifter 

5.  Even  as  thy  defire  is,  fo  are  all  things  in  Enghnd.     Nothing  kt^t.  back^.       But  for  thy  fak^e,  as  zChilde. 
fuch  as  are  thine,  are  with  them  friendly  ufed  dealeth  with 

6 .  If  thou  fljouldejl  not  le  called  home-jhow  Jhouldeji  thou  enjoy  the  benefit  of  God  his  prr,mife,which  "^* 
hath  {aid  :  'thou  f.'alt  call  her  bach^,  &c.  tn  her  prefervation.  But,  fiiix  thefe  things  niuft  come 
to  pafTe.  Ihe  Countrey  (hall  be  divided,  one  rife  up  againji  another.  Great  treafons  be  wrousj^t. 
tea,  and  one  cut  another  s  throat :  And  when  the  greatefi  troubles  are,  then  Jh  a  It  thn-tfave  her  life. 
then  fi-^all  the  wall  be  hrokjtn  down  :  And  free  pajfage  Jhall  be  made :  And  fuch  ,JS  are  sl{prners  ,  and 
afcend  up  the  narrow  jieps,  or  If  ew  themselves  on  the  walls,  Jhall  be  trodden  down  and  de  ■  aced.  Hers 

is  underjianding that  which  tho't,  E.K.  haji^is  apart  of  four,  and  it  become  the  fifth :  tet  it  is 

noneof  thf  four,  digriifitd  in  a.  Cube,  whofe  root  is 'f'2<$2.  ■       -V-iV>i.l  ■    •  iT.-   , 

IwiHkj'ow  it fljortlj.       tbouhaji  no  power  (for  time  ismt yet  corm.)  B»t  wift  bebrotigbt 

forth  Ihortly,  that  it  may  heUjt  wn.  .....  Made  it,  wa«  *  Holy  (but  it  n.«  made  by  thofe  that.  ..... 

Jt :  which  is  not  man,  neither  any  thing  of  wickjrdneffe)  which  for  his  fins  died,  leaji  he  Jhould  have 
been  deliroyed  in  the  fecund  death.  Revealed  unto  thee^  neither  fortliin*  own  fake  ;  nor  ac  thy 
xequeft ;  B'-'t  by  the  will  of  God,  for  a  time  to  come, 

E-  K-  I  pray  you  to  tell  mc  plainly  what  it  is. 

Mad Be  content.' I  f peak,  thut,  leaji  thau Jhouldeji  fm,  God  the  father,  the  Son,  and  the 

holy  Gholi  bltjfe  yon. 

B'K'  ^ow  (hi  is  zone ^as  ami? hty  tall  "Sipoman.  iiotc.  mdimi 

A.  Veritati  xtemaEa  fit  asterna  Laus  Gloria  &  Beaediftio.  °""  '*°^'- 

E.  K    Amen- 

|— 

^m       Wednddny,  Martii  4- M^fte.     1584.  LASKO.         CHartii  i^.  Stylo  Novo. 

^V  A.  After  my  Petition  made  to  God  (at  the  inftaiice  of  ^.  L.  not  prefent  now|to  know  of 
"Mildavia  Kingdom,  the  ftate  to  come  :  that  is,  when  A.  L.  and  by  what  means  he  fhould  en- 
joy the  fame  (being  before  at  Afart/rfi^jpromifed  nnto  him.)  And  at  my  reqiiefting  that  M^- 
dimi  might  be  the  Minifter  of  his  will  therein  :  At  length  appeared  Madimi. 

A.  Gloria  Patri,  &  filio&  fpiritui  fanfto  :  ficut  eratin  principle,  &c  nunc  8c  feniper,  3c  in 
fecula  (eculorum.    Amen. 

Mad.  Amen«  A  certain  rich  man,  father  of  an  houjfjold  ,  returned ~  and  found  all  things  out 
of  order  :  And  lo,  he  lookfd  tip,  and  faid  unto  his  fervant .-  Arife  ,  and  be  read),  for  Iwill  fet  my 
houfe  in  order.   Go  to  Affbn,  and  I  will  meet  thee  there  :  And  he  arofe  up,and  went  unto  Aflbn  :  But 

his  majier  came  not :  At  length  he  faid  unto  him.     Behold,  I  will  not  dwell  h Remove  my  houjhold 

vnto  Banal,  tfMii  he  did  fo.     And  the  fervant  prepared  afeajl  :  But  h's  majier  caiue  not,-  And  he 

faid  unto  him  the  third  time  ;  why  art  thou  forrie,  or  why  art  tho»  angry  ? Oh  unto  me,  for  I  am 

thy  maiier.    Andhe  faid  :  Rife, go  unto  Molfcheck «,<?;/«/  thou  jhalt  meet  me  there.    But  lo,  tbm  fay- 

eth  the  fervant ,  my  majier  for getteth and  hath  commanded  me  twice,  and  I  have  prepared  for 

him,  and  he  came  not,  and  he  faith  unto  we  the  third  time,  Arife,  go.,  and  I  will  meet  thee  :  thou 
Jfmlt  finde  me  there;    But  he  will  there  alfo  deceive  r/ie  :  And  he  fent  before,and  behold,  his  maiier.,.. 

But  immediately  after  that, the  fervants  mejfenger the  father  of  the  houjhold  came;ai.dhe  looked 

hut  his  fervant  WiK  not  there.  And  he  fent  for  bim,  and  commanded  him  to  be  ..».  and  to  be  brought ' 
with  violence  :  But  the  fervant  faid,  deal  not  thus  with  me,  for  it  is  violent  :  But  the  maiier  anfwer" 

td,  and  faid :  What  I  command  thee ghteil :  For  fervitnts  have  ho  freedom  of  thenifelves.  And  it 

Came  to  paffe  that  after  the  maiier  had  gathered  together  his  friends :  He  faid  unto  them^  Arife  up, 
and  finde  me  cne  that  »  F  A  I  T  H  F  U  L  L  with  OBEDIENCE,  then  be  jir  etched  out  his 
hand,  and  he  faid  unto  his  fervant.  Hold,  tal^e  thy  reward  :  For,  from  mf  thou  art  banijhed.  How 
fay  you,  was  this  Juiiice,  that  he  did  unto  bis  fervant  ?  .        ; 

A.  O  Lord,  we  appeal  to  thy  mercies,  and  we  acknowledge  thy  judgements  alwayes  to  be 
moft  juft  and  true,  &c. 

Mad.  the 


7  2.         A  true  delation  of  D"".  Dee  his  Jciions  with  fpirits,  ^c. 


Mad.  7he  ArK  of  the  Lord  was  the  Coven-int  0/ OBEDIENCE,  ll-ipfy  are  thofe  that  enter. 

E  K'  There  f pringcth  a  thing  before  her  1  ke  a  Reed,  buc  withered. 

Mad  .  Vn'o  thee,  [E.  K.  pointing  to  the  Reed,]  thus  fayeth  the  Lord  ,  Bfcauy  thou  canii  not 
end"re  the  end  of  winter  ,  Spring  on,  and  gr^w  :  hm  in  the  midjt  of  C'^j]  leautj  ,  in  the  midji  of 
fiimmcr,lhal!  thy  dejiruaionbe. 

A.  L.  I  yvill  anoint  thee  before  thj  time,  for  my  promife  fahj  :  That  thou  may efi  fall  in  the  midji 
of  thine  own  time,  for  thy  weakjitjfe  is  great. 

£.  K-  she  ftandeth  and  holdcth  up  her  hands  coward  hcavcHjand  faith  no^ 
thing  I  hat  I  can  hear. 

Mad.   Ga,  mr\e  hajh  :  All  fieff}  /V  alowinalle. 

E.  K.    ^he  Ipeakech  another  way,  not  toward  us. 

Mad.    I  am  fealed,neither  cinl  fpeak^any  more, 

E.  K-  Now  fh;goeth  away  Ike  a  three  cornerd  Cloud. 

A  Oh  Jefu  have  mercy  on  us.  Oh  King  of  Jews  have  mercy  on  us.  Oh  Conqucrour 
againft  Hell,  death,  and  the  Devil  have  mercy  on  us. 

E.  K.  ]s]ow  is  he  here,  who  was  laft  here.  Arc  you  Naha^t^*-.  ^  .  In  the 
nameoi  jefu.s.    Lord  be  merciful!  unto  us, &c. 

. . . .  /j  Jealidh  1  am  excepted-  "-Jam  commanded, and  my  Office  it  to  trach. 
■    E.  K-  He  turn:ih  about  with  a  great  fvvit[ne{Tw,at  length  bcltandcth, 

A.  O  Lord,  and  our  defire  is  to  he  taught  of  thee,  in  thee,  and  for  thy  fervice. 
Nal.    1o  hiti  to  vclomit  is  faid,  C  0  :  Thuf,  I  f"y,  let  htm  be  go-ng.        For  God  hatb  Jiretched 
"  oi:X  h  s  ht':d,  "»d  h  fjyeth,  I  will  nA  plft(\ itLdL\,  hht  With  vengtaace. 

£.  K-  Hcfurncih  ^g^in- 

L.  OGod,fowhcm  isthat  GO  fayed?  A.    I  was  fick  of  an 

•Ka!,   Ihiv  mortal  man,  who  is  the  lord  of  health .?  jRue,»nd  ihcreupon  did 

^.  The  God  of  Heaven  and  Farth.  j^^  ,,f„  f„,  ,1,^  Lo^d. 

•   Nal.  Ihe  Lord  is  angry,  and  he  f  'id  unto  thee.  ^.  t.  Hishelp,chirfly, 

A    ViJeT'b.  Begone.  with  Coach,  Hoje,  and 

^7juJ'co,<-'-'^'       ■^''  ^^'^^^  '^  "  '^"y  f'^^'        ^^^  '^  *"  ''*'''  ^"^''^  ^"'^  ""*  ^"^^  intercefioH     Money, 
«  'Z  mTm    for  him,  he  had  been  nothing :  Seal  thefe  things,  makj  hnjie, 
de  tnhiti  w:du  Begomg. 

Pain*  M'fe-         Fcr  the  Lord  is  angry. 
,uvd't,e-ga         ^    OGod,  &c. 

homms.oc.         ^^^^  ^^^  hefayeth Lasky  hath  fejoyced  with  an  Harlot,andhatb  mafured  me  ,  which  am 

vnknown  :  But  he  Jhall  be  rewarded. 
A. 

A.  I..  To  thee  it  is  faid  :  Makj  hafie,  and  be  gone,        I  will  fulfill  my  promife  in  him  for  thjT 
'         fake  :  But  he  pall  fall,  hfi'tfi  none  of  thy  acCfUaihtance- 

A.  Pronounce  favour  and  mercy  onme:  who  in  my  fin,  ,^... and  fingleneflc  of  heart  re  Joyce 
to  do  what  i  can  polTibly  perform. 

Nal    TW  *ky  h':ve  faid   againjl  thee.        Let  hint  not  g$.       Of  th^m  thut  fayeth  the  Lord. 
They  Jlalltarric  where  they  wopN  not.       Ceaf ,  write  no  more, 
A.  SoliDeOjOmnis  honor  8c  Gloria.     Amen, 


<J^fo«^(?j,  Martii  p.  Hora  9.     Mane  reccflimus  a &;  prima  nofte  fuimus  apud  Petr 

T'tifdity,  10. 

Wedmplay.  n. 

2hi<rfd^j,  1 2. .....  At  M'ch'w  we  lodged  atnight. 

Frid-y^  Martii  13.   W  e  canK  toCrdcOB-,  circa  tertiam  a  Meredie  ,  and  were  Ibdred   in  the 
S^ilurbs  by  theChuich  at. ......  Where  we  remained  a  fevenighr,  and  then  (I  and  my  wifcj  wc 

rtmoved  to  the  houfe  in  St.  Stephens  ftrcet,  which  I  had  hired  for  a  year  ,  for  80  eylders  (of 
50  s,r.)  And  Maiier  £  Iward  Kelij  came  to  us  on  Fryday  in  the  Ealter  week  (by  tr.e  new  Gre- 
g  rian  Kalendar^  being  the  ^yday  of  Afjrr^,  by  the  old  Kalendar  :  l-Ut  the  lixih  A^y  oi  April, 
by  the  new  Kalendar,  Eafter  day  being  the  firll  day  of  April  mPoland,  by  the  new  Gregorian 
inllitution. 

CRACOVIA.       Martii  13.       An.  1584. 

Omnis  Honor,  Lam,  G'oria  &  Gratiarum  Aciio,  fit  Deo  Nojlro  Omnipeteuiij  Trim  &  wii  nunc 
&  femper.       Amen.         A. 

MEN* 


aJ true%elation o/D',  Dee  ^is  Mions  mthffirits,  6cc.       73 


MENSIS    MYSTICUS     SAOBATICUS, 
Tars  prima  ejufdem. 


Titefday  mornings  Anno  1584.  Jprilis  10.  Jiilo  novo  CfeQoriano 

CR  ACOVIyE.  . 

^Fter  our  divers  prayers  and  confeftation  of  our  Inimiliry,  obediencej 
and  credit  in  thefe  Anions  :  and  being  come  now  to  Cracovia^  the 
place  fanftified,  whereunto  we  were  willed  to  make  haft,  d^c.  Ac 
lenth  appeared  Nalvage. 

E  K-  He  hath  a  Gown  of  white  filk,  with  a  Cape 
with  three  pendants  with  taffcL  on  the  ends  of  them 
all  green  ;  it  is  fur,  white  and  fecmcth  to  (hine,  with  a 
wavering  glittering.  On  his  head  is  nothing,  he  hath 
no  herd-  His  phyfiognomy  is  hke  the  pidurc  of  King  FA-^ard  the  fixth  ^ 
his  hair  hangeth  down  a  quarter  of  the  length  of  the  Cap,  Ibmewiiat 
curling,  yellow-  He  hath  a  rod  or  wand  in  his  hand,  almoii  as  big  as  my 
little  finger  ••  it  is  of  Gold,  and  divided  into  three  equal  parts  with  i 
brighter  Gold  than  the  reft-  He  Itandcth  upon  his  round  tabic  of  Chris 
ftal,  or  rather  Mother  of  Pearl :  There  appear  an  infinite  number  of  letters 
on  the  fame,  as  thick  as  one  can  ftand  by  another  .  the  table  is  fomev\«hac 
inclined  on  one  iidc  :  heftandeth  in  the  very  middle;  his  garment  covet- 
ethhis  feet  •  hisbreaftfcemethfmoothas  the  down  remaining  of  a  Swan 
when  all  the  feathers  be  ofF^  fo  is  his  neck,  i^c.  He  is  lean  and  long* 
vifaged. 

L.  The  infinite  mercies  of  God  be  on  ns  :  and  the  light  of  his  countenance  fliinc  on  us ; 
and  his  favourable  countenance  be  on  irs. 

Nal Amen-,  untohim  that  is,  and  was,  ajtd  liveth  for  ever. 

6.  K-  He  looketh  earneftly  on  his  table ,  and  turncth  him  to 
view  it- 

Nal All  things  are  in  order.     Thus  faith  the  Mejfenger  of  him  which  U  the  God  of  JFif- 

dom.  Is  jour  worthitteffe  fuch,  as  you  can  merit  fo  great  mercy?  or  are  your  vejfels  cleanfed,  an^ 
made  aft  to  receive  and  hold  the  fweet  •liquor j  pure  under  ft  andmg  it  ft  If  ? 

h. 

Hath  the  Sun  entred  into  your  bowels,  or  have  you  taftedof  the  Might-dew  ?  Where  are  your 
wedding  Garments  ;  or  after  what  fort  do  jstt  provide  for  your  marriage  ?  Vnfeafonedyou  are 
and  withered  flejh,  partakjrs  ofthofe  things  which  mah^e  you  holy  :  -through  which  partakjnx  and 
the  fecret  providence  of  him  that  is  the  Highefi,you  became  dignified  to  the  end,  and  arefi/ffi:?entl/ 
yvaftjtd  for  the  time  of  entrance.  0  ftiff-neck^ed  people  you  deftrve  nothing,  andyetyou  have  the 
hire  offuch  as  labour.  But,  what,  can  corruption  be  partaJ^er  of  thofe  things  that  are  incorrupt 
tible  ?   or  man,  which  favoureth  in  himfelf,  can  you  favour  alfo  of  the  Almighty. 

Oyou  weakJings,6you  of  no  faith,  0 you  Cankers  of  the  earth  ■■,  Where  is  thejh'ameyou  have  ; 
Jf^hereare  the  tears  you  let  fall ;  Where  it  the  humility  yoi*  are  taught  to?  Nay  jgu  (ire  fuch  as 
fay  in  your  hearts ;  if  the  Spring  be  fair,  the  Uar-jeft  is  Itkj  to  be  good:  If  thefe  thing  come  toj>aJf:, 
n  is  the  finger  of  the  Lord.  But  fuch  is  jour  imperfedion,  fuch  are  the  frtiits  uf  the  flep,  atid 
the  vanity  of  mortality. 

Notwhhftanding,  confider  that  you  are  fervants  :  Do  therefore  the  will  of  your  Mailer.  Tou 
are  become  free:  Be  faithful  aytdtb:inkj'ul  to  him  that  is  the  giver  of  liberty  :  Nay  you  are  be- 
come children  :  part  alters  of  thi  ctunfel  of  kimthat  fitteth  and  feth,  and  faith  I  am.  Therefore 
he  fober,  faithful,  and  Waver  nqt^f^rtke  inheritance  of  your  Fath(r  is  great  :  your  freedom  is 
"Without  recompence,  and  your  M after  the  King  of  Juftice. 

L  Where 


74        A  tmeB^elation  of  I>.  Dee  his  JBions  mtbfpirits,  &c. 

Where  are  the  peopky  cr  in  what  generation  did  they  dwell,  that  hath  been  thus  acquainted  and 

dr  ami  into  familiarity  with  the  true  Servants  and  Angels  of  God  ?    Vnto  whom  have  thofe  mylle- 

ries  been  opened.     Is  itnot  [aid,  of  thofe  that  are  fan&ified  ,  '£he  Lord  appeared,  ratto   them  mi. 

vilion  ••  But  he  cometh  to  you  when  you  are  awakj  •'  Vnto  them  he  came  ttnlooksd  for.,  untoyot  he 

T  he  tnd  ma-    Cometh  requefted.        Arife  up  therefore,  and  be  not  forgetful  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  you  ;  for 

keth  All.  ^he  things  ofthi^  tforld  are  not,  until  they  be  done,  neither  is  there  any  thing  affured,  but   by  the  end, 

p^-j}j  It  yeas  [aid  unto  Abraham,    And  I  will  dejiroy  them.  He  believed  it  ',  but  he  as\ed  not,  when. 

Great  is  the  reward  of  Faith  •■,  for  it  giveth  ftrength  :   But  thofe  that  are  faithful  are  not  of  this 

world.        Notwithlianding,  you  have  f^iii,   (  as  it  was  [aid  by  the  Difciples  toGhrili,when  they 

were  jet  unpure,  and  blind  )  When  fhall  thcfe  things   come  to  pafle  t    Lord,  what  is  meant  by 

^'^'^^  th^,  or  that  P        Simple  Faith  excelleth  all  Science.       For,   Heaven  and    Earth  Jh all  per ijh  in 

F»ich.  xheir  corruption :    But  the  voices  of  the  Lord,  much  more  his  promifes,  are  become  Angels  for  ever  : 

for  as  the  Sun  hegetteth  in  the  earth,  and  is  father  of  many  things  that  live  in  corruption   and  have 

end  ;  So  is  the  God  of  Heaven,  the  bringer  forth  and  begetter  of  things  celejiial  with  life  and  for 

ever.     For  why.  Dixit  &  faftum  eft,    Every  Idea  in  eternity   is  become  for  ever,  and  what  is 

Ide».  thought,  is  become  a  living  creature.     1  teach  you  amy  liery. 

As  the  tree  in  fappy  life,  watering  her  felf  throughly  ,  bring^th  forth  the  ornaments  of  her  own 
beauty  :  So  the  fpiritual  part  of  man  being  good  and  dignified,  bttrnijheth  himfelf,  with  hi*  found 
and  faithful  thought :  I  mean  the  glory  and  (hew  of  his  own  beauty;  for  the  foul  of  man  grow  etht 
either  with  beauty  to  falvatim,  or  with  di/honour  and  filthineffey  to  damnation. 

I  have  done  my  Commandnient,  I  have  as  a  Schoolmafier  warned  you,  and  as  a.  friend  counfel' 
ledyou  :    Iwill  alfo  teach  you.  ' 

LE.K.  Herpeakethinathinfmallvoice.!] 

A.   Heufed  a  great  paufe,  and  filence. 

E.  K-  He  llandeth  and  pointcth  with  his  rod  to  the  letters  of  his  Tabled 
as  if  he  made  feme  account  or  reckoning.  He  went  out  of  the  middle,  and 
mcafuredhow  may  fteps  it  is  about. 

Nal.  , Pater,  Filius,Spiritui  SanUtu  :  Fundamentum,  fubjlantia^  &  frtncipium  omnium, 

\_  £.  K-  Thought  in  his  minde,  rertm^  and  he  anfwcrcd  his  thought,  fay- 
ing. What  need  1  (ay  rerum  ?  The  Grammarians  will  be  on  my  fide-  Onu 
niumj  is  more  than  to  fay  dmnium  rerum-  ] 

E.  K-    This  feeraeth  to  be  fpoken  by  fome  other,  in  my  imagination. 

Nal Omnium,  it  the  thing  that  is  my  charge. 

E-  K.  He  ftill  conferrcch  place  to  place,  O'c • 
So.  -E.K.  NowhcftandethftiU, 

Corpus  ommm  ••"  £•  ^-  He  pointcth  to  the  whole  or  round  table 
which  he  ftandcth  on. 

1.  TCke  fi>bfiance  it  attributed  to  God  the  Father. 

2.  The  firjl  circular  mover ^  the  circumference,  God  the  Son^  "the  finger  of  the  Father^  and 
mcver  of  all  things. 

3.  7he  order  and  kititting  together  of  the  parts  in  their  due  and  per fe^  proportion^  God  tht 
Holy  Ghoji.        Lo,  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things. 

£'  K^'  He  ftill  counteih  and  conferreth  places  and  letters  together, 

Nal Lo,  it  it  divided  into  <\.  parts :    whereof  two  are  dignified:   one  not  yet  dignifit* 

lutfliall  be  :   the  other  without  glory  or  dignification. 

£•  K- He  leemeth  topoint  tolbraedivifions. 

Nal Vnderjland  God,  as  tbefubjiance  of  the  whole,  (  as  above  [aid.  ) 

E.  K.  He  countcth  again. 

Nal.  ..i...  Thefubjianceofthis  part  it  calledViti. 

E.  K.  He  pointcth  to  the  uppcrmoft  part. 

Nal C<i//f(i  VitaSuprema.         See  here  three  fmall  lines. 

[  £.  X.  Thofe  ihree  fmall  lines  appear  in  the  uppermofl  parcel- "] 
Say ...  GaudiHm,  [  pointing  to  the  uppermoft  line. 

Say  ...frafentia  [  pointing  tO  thcfcCOnd.] 

Lapdantes  or  Triumpbantes  [  pointing  tO  thc  third'D 

£.  K.    NoVf 


<^tYue  Relation  ofjy.  Dee  his  ABicns  mth  fpiritSy  6cc.  7  ^ 


E-  K-  Now  he  beginneth  to  account  in  the  fccond  portion, 

Nal :1!jf  Contittenty  Vita.  f_  He  countcth  again . 

E.  K,  The  four  portions  arc  of  equal  widcncfTc,  buc  not  of  equal  clear- 
nefle ;  and  thit  about  the  center  is  01  fuskifli  or  leadidi  colour. 

E-  K-  Now  he  flieweth  three  (mall  lines  in  the  (econd  portion.  He 
feemeth  to  fpeak  to  himfelf  fomewhar. 

Nal Say  Poteftas  ....  to  the  firji  line  pointing.       Motus  to  the  fecond  ; 

Miniftrantes to  the  third. 

E,  K,  Now  he  procecdcth  to  the  third  circular  portion- 

Nal Ihk  Continent  is  a!fo  Vita  [_  pointing  to  the  third  portion  [J  non  dignificata,  fed 

dignificanda.  .  , 

Nal See  ....  E.  K.  ^here  Are  itifo  three  linesy     Aftio  in  thefirji  line.     Faftum  ,..; 

in  thffecnd.         Confirmantes in  the  third,         Sirha,  this  is  true  Logick^. 

Q  £..  He  faid  fo  to  E.  K.  who  now  gave  himfelf  to  ftudy  Logick  diligently.  ] 

E.K-  Now  he  ftandeth  trembling.  , 

Nal. ..,;..  Oh  qualis  ellJujUtia  inter  miferos  ? 

t. SedjHiors  eft  qus  peperithanc  vicam. 

Vita  eji  etia»i  ktec,  fed  ^Utep'pertt  mors.  •        =      ..•} 

Say  Lu&us  ...».  P 

Difcordia >     Here  feem  three  lines  alfo. 

Conftmdantes j 

Thofe  that  do  their  duty  pall  receive  .their  reward.       Let  my  diligence  teach  yon  diligence 

Be  not  angry,,  becaufeyou  do  not  underjiand  :   rhefe  he  means  to  mderjiand.  E.  K.  con-      To  £  K 

felled  that  he  Was  very  angiy.  ** 

Nal   Pray  unto  God^  for  I  am  refijied. 

A.    Dem  in  ad jutoriiim  noftrum  intende,  &c. 

Say  ....  Vita  S»prenta.  [  pointing  to  the  uppermoft  line  of  all.  ]  I  find  it  (  by  addi- 

tion J  tn  this  Language,  I  ad,  but  written  thus,  toward  the  left  hand,  m  three  angles 

I        d 


a 


_  Say ....   Gaudium  ..m.  Moz.     ifindit  is  a  name  afcending  and  anfweretb  to  the  two  extremes 
of  I  ad  tn  this  manner. 


I     d    z 
a    o 
tn 


A.  I  pray  you,  is  Mozod,  a  word  of  three  letters,  or  of  five  > 

-      w7-i"f  ^^  ^^°l^  ^^"^^  '  '''  "  ^'"'^'^  extended.  [  A.  z  extended  is  zod.  1 
A.  Will  you  pardon  me  if  r  ask  you  another  qucftion  of  this  exten  fion  ? 
0^** ^"y""-  ^'^'^  "' it  felf  ftgntfietb  Joy  ;  but  Mozod  extended,  fignifietb  the  Joy  o 

^  No  wordjn  his  ridical  form  is  extended. 

NaL Thefe  doubts  will  at  length  grow  eafie. 

Fr^tfentia I  find  it  called  Zir. 

So.,..,  I    d    z 

a     o     i 
ni    z    r 

This  Leflbn  is  greater  than  any  that  was  learned  in  Cracevia  this  day, 
'al. ......  Fotentia Butfay,  Vitafecunda.   I  ^dbut  thus. 


b     n    a 


Id  2  s  a  i 
a.,  o  i  g  o  d 
m    z    r     V    r     r 


d.  a    z..  36 

i    a    B        d     i 

L   2  I  mil 


^,6       A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dec  his  Anions  with /pints,  &c. 


/  w  II  teach joti  here  a^'ttr  the  dijUndion  of  them. 

A.    You  nuan  o\  I  ud  divcifly  lignifying. 

Say  .....  Pnceftas Ifi'ii  n  Bab.       Ii  doth  afctnd  from  the  right  hand  to  the  leftt 

Morio  ....   I  find  it  Zna. 
llfjttilhiot  fall  out  foy  but  they  will  fall  out  well  enough, 

Kal.  ..  ...  Viratertia I  ad. 

t    I  p  ay  you,  what  'n  o'.Mytijrantes? 
Kai Lool\j'0'i  xoyoT  C'mrge. 

A  10        .  ..     Jior 

F-Tt-^m    Gra 

Vi'ii,  qu*  eciani  eft  mors. 

I  ad  . 

L  ^nf     J^er 

V'j'Ordia  .....   Olf 


r     a     I 

If  the  cr  ier  o  *"  f '1-  Talk  h  ex  Cphhu  5an3:o, 
l">r  f  h\ia  :ce  of  the  Father ;     Ho»  Ifali'  we  -^aiher  thf  C>rcnnt^tr»ce,xeh/rh  is  th?  Son  ?. 

"theS^nii  ihe  Image  of  his  Father  :   J'lere^ore,  i/ibn  deatht   be  m',ji  i>t  ihi  image  of  his  father 

J/fubftaiuia  be  in  forma  Cruci^,  th-n  he  Son  it  thel>nage  of  hi:.  Fat!:fr» 
L'tudantes   LHUi'). 

A    The  left  I  pray  you  ro  delivcni^. 

Nal Beur  with  me^for  itaeafie  foi^J-Uf 

l:.t  hard  for  we. 

Minilirjtttes Ltng^ 

Coyjfirmantes .....  Such. 

L.  Now. 

Nal irbenlkjtcKP^youJhall. 

A.    As  Sach. 

G'fibe  merciful  to  man. 

li  is  fo  terrii'e.,  that  I  tremble  to  gather  it, 
CoufuuJaiites  ....   Vrch. 

7h-:s  I  h-ive  mudfp/ain  thii  body  gemra.'ly  :     7he  particulars   are  lon.^,  hard,  and  tedious.' 

T.hy  na-iiehe  bhfffd^  0  God,  fohii-h  caniopen  a  meuUiy  vhereby  th*  pcvers  immediatemay  be 
cfened.  Jinto  wan.  PuWerygUryf  and  honour,  be  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the  true  body  of  all  things^ 
and  ar'  li'e  eternal. 

E^K.  Now  h:  is  fudJenly  vanidicd  away  with  the  TaSIe. 

1  eo  nojho  fit  omnis  laus  ^  gratjarum  afiio  nunc  isf  i/t/emfiterna 
Jeculorum  Jecuia-      Amen- 


Th'-r''day,  M'^e,  ^'^/Vi^ll     l'5S4.        Cramvia. 

A.   Some  delay  upon  our  pr:iyers  nude,  at  lengcii   appeared    Kalvage  mfkz^t  zndzttitc 
as  1-ift  bttore  ;   He  Uaudeth  fii:l. 

Nal   Benediilumftt  n.)>:<^n'D'j^iin'  i>t  ^tern'un. 

A    Amtn. 

Nal Audice  mei  fratre^i  pari-ncer. 

T'f  Godhead  in  lis  ft  nt  judgewent  Keet>itig  in  hif  Ah^/''hty  hofem,  the  image  and  form  of  a't 
thinjis,  vniverfjUy^  ■'ojkj'd  dovin  if  n  the  turth  •,  for  he  faid.  Let  w  ni,w  go  d:rt>n  airo'ig  th,  for.s 
0/  men  :  H  fayc  that  all  ih/>  gs  erevp  Comrar}  to  their  crati  n  and  nature  ;  either  i{eePtng  their 
dignities  and fecret  vertues  It^utsip  in  .bJ:'trH</^  itreje  noro'fly  feri'ling  ,  throus,h  the  imbe.i'tij  k 
and  frowardntffe  cf  igncrauce:  So  th  it  it  v  $  (aid,,  B^ld,  J  delight  net  in  the  fVo' Id  :  7  >e 
hlemcnts  are  dtfi.'edy  thefnsofmeM-u>ici{ed^ihii-:0:lie>  be  o.ne  dmghiis^  and  the  i^rwurd  t.rts 
(  the  fecret  th.itt.bers  of  their  hearts  J  the  dms  and  du^gt'tns  0  '  rA?  dimied  :  I'teref-jre  I  will 
dr  .w  mj  fpiritfrom  am^vgij-  them,  und  they  (halt  leiome  .T*.re  drv.nken^  and  their  ignoru,ice  fuck 
as  nev  rw.s  '.   No,  not  ft  te  the  fall  of  he  uve    .  "  \ 

jtntieh'ijlur.  F  r,  I  .,  the  time  is  ic/wc,  And  he  thai  is  the  Son  of  LInripJueoM'"iHirr,is  and  liverh  :  Z'»to 

him  tier'f ore  (hall  be  given  Itrtngth  and  pvwrr  :  and  t'.\:  Kings  0.  i/.\-  L-rth  jhu.t i e- on.e  wad  : 
yea,  ixen  r'gifrg  wad  i  yea  even  in  th.' third  widn  ff^yutid  that  in  the  defth  of  thrir  ovnnr  agi- 
nations; and  1  Will  build  my  temple  tn  the  Wo^d^,  yea  cvin  m  the  J^if  n   ^Ud  ;  und  Ivill 

lecome 


h 

c 

r 

V 

i 

d 

z 

s 

a 

i 

1 

a 

0 

i 

0 

d 

h 

V 

m 

z 

r 

V 

r 

r 

c 

a 

b 

n 

a 

f 

0 

s 

a 

s 

d 

a 

z 

S 

e 

a 

s 

t 

.4 
a 

b 

r 

d 

i 

1 

a 

n 

g 

^  T • — — "- ■  ■     ■■'.'■I 

M'  true  Rc  att'jri  of  0\  Dee  his  AUions  uith  ffirits,  d^c.        -7 


hecofttet  S  rpeyt  in  the  v  Idem  jf  :  for  I  have  ttickfd  r:p  wj/  g<trments  and  am  fled  dw.iy^  ani  She  'mhe  wilderi 
JhaUmno'H  omh   Mo^ttt-^rhis  tiith't  com'^ort.  (,_(fg_ 

Lo  ,  rh'  Ih'tiffer  fpukf  3    and  thr  eurth  became  »ii'^y  ,   ftid  frdl  of  fogge  ^  that   the   So/''  of 
run   might  fl  ep  in  hifovr-,!   confvfion.  T  he  fee  ndThtoider  fpak^,  a>id  there  aroft  fp.rii ,   fch 

M  art  f-jr  So'ith- flyers ,  ly'it  hfs.  Charmers-,  Jnd  Sed'icers :  and  they  are  entred  into  the  holy  pi'!  vj, 
a^4htvetjk.f*'"P  t'>fir  (^eats  in  mm.  J/"oebe  7n/'o  the  earth  therefore :  For,  it  is  C^rrutt  -i^  IVoe'ce 
jinto  th"  earthy  for  Jl e  is  furrcndrei  to  her  adver^.try  :  JVoe  be  unto  the  earth, jhe  is  dtlner.'d  into 
the  hands  of  her  enemy  :  lea^  Jl^oe  be  vnto  thefons  of  men,  for  their  vffels  are  foyfoned.  Bnt  tv.n 
then  (aid  the  Lord,  L  ,  /  rvill  be  kj^o^-  n  in  the  rvildernfffe^  isnd  will  Triumph  in  my  vre.ikjuff-. 

A»dlo^he  called  >o'<,  and  you  became  dnnk^en  ,  and  foo'/Jj  with  the  fpir/t  of  God  :  Aid  it  vjs 
[aid  Vefcend^  for  he  caL'eth,  and  hath  culled  :  an  I  K.a[>iiael  thatcrv'ght  up  the  pray  rs  defiendtd  :  R-piui,' 
and  he  WM  frill  with  the  power,  &  fpir/t  of  Godiund  it  lecame  ••'  VoCirine,  fuel)  vva.s  nevt r  fi  oni  the  ^.-^  q^ 
beginning  :  A''f  painted,  or  carried:  filed,  or  im  tgin^'d  ly  ■.)ia>;,or  accord  me,   to  then-  i»i  .(i^'n  iiif.na,  ft,inc. 
vhich  are  of  f.elh :  tut  On:ple,pl:>in,jull  of  iire}t^ih,mid  the  powcrof  the  holy  Ghol  :  rbtchVo- 
Rrine  hezan  ,  m  man  did.^nak^ed/y  from  the  earth  :  bi't  yet  ,  the  image  of  perfedion.         Ihis  ftl''- 
fame  A^t  is  it,  which  is  delivered  unto  you  an  in  fallible  >  oC:r>i;e,  containing  in  it  the  w  iters.,  v  A;  -i 
runne  thr.uzh  -nany  Gates  :  even  above  the  Gace  of  iiinoccnc}'  ,  wijerein  jou  are  ta-  (rht    to  fiy>  le 
tut  the  D'H^niry  and  C'.rruption  of  nature  :  a.fu  in.ide  p.trtak^rs  of  the  fecret  J'  dgen-tnts    f"  t^e 
A^'T'ighty  t)  be  male  m iniftft,ayid  to  be  put  /execution.        Which  k^mwJedge  m yov  is  to  I ^  niids 
ferfeH.  two  ways.,  bv  power, mediate,  and  i^mnediate.        I  nmeditte^y  from  God,  in  refpeCi  0'  hit 
will,  and  fcCri't  Jydoements,  M  unto  the  A^'^li's-     By  means  and  tr'iditi:jn,  as  fro'n  ru,  o'enif"  thi 
fitb.i  <nce  ami  body  of  nature,  according  to  our  own  imajje,  wlncii  is  the  thing  I   have  iiov  in 
hand.       I  am  therefore  t-  inirrd  and  inform yor,  according  to yo'r  Vo&rine  delivered  ,  whith  is 
ctntained  i>i  .^p  '  ab/es.    71/40  voyces, '/r  calhn.s :  wW/^  Krc  fAr  Natural  K'-ye;,'o   pnth''",  wjf  '    „^  „ 
4P  'vt  ^^.    (  for  Oie  is  vot  t(,teo,eHtd')  Gates  f  indtrf  a  tiding  ,vher,by  jO"  Jha'l  have  K^i'^'li'di'.c  ^^iyl^^.^^i^^.if 
to  move  every  Gaie,  at\d  to  call  out  as  many  at  yon  p'eafe,  or  Jl)<llbe  tk  vght  neccjfiry,  which  an  ufe.  ' 
T'ry  we  l,riih'to'  (l-.,i}id  )ri''f/y^o''en  vnto  you  t.'n  fcrets  of  thfir  Cit/es,&  m  ikjey  «  underft^.nd  ptrr- 
feftly  the  contained  in  the  Tables.    Through  whub  ejtowledge  ^-a^i  flhil'  e.ifdy  be  able  xo]v.d"^f,;i''t  as 
thi  M  or  Id  doth,  but  p^rfeU'y  of  the  world,  and  of  all  things  :ontained  within  the  Comp  ffe   of  Na- 
ture, and  -if  all  things  vhi  h  are  ^uby.£i  to  an  end. 

But  behold,  this  chaige  of  mine  is  tied  unto  time  :  7'(>frf/6r(>^<>^///<re>«t  to /f.^rM,  diligent  to         n  te. 
he-ir,  and  that  With  patience:  For  it  is  neither  a  fr-c  School,  nor  a  School  of  continuance.     For  /.s    'kt  time 
fowr  is  not  given  uati  me  beyond  the  fiift  day  oi  A ':g^Ji  ticxt,  fo  hav.-  you  no  iK'Sn^'th   to  learn  '^^'"^  '"".''  '*» 
after,  becaufe  I  am  the  ftaff  of  your  Doftrine.  ^'^  '  ™"  "^''^ 

Nal 1  am  for  th.'  comfort  of  the  world  ,  and  not  for  the  hindrance  :  Thus  fayeth  the  Lcrd  a*  Piift  ntxt 

To  them  that  have  Harve  i  let  them  rear,  and  ^nto  fch  M  hav  labotr  let  them  work  As  for  me, 
1  am  ti  d  to  tint'.,  and  am  ready  at  all  times  :  For  I  meafure  not  your  night,  nor  day. 

A.   Thanks  be  unro  the  higheft 

Na\.:,..Ceafe  now  with  me, for  no  nmre  difcendeth- 

Soli  Deo  Honor  &  Gloria, 

Afternoon,  the  fame  Thuifday.  .«..  After  fome   fhovt   Ejaculations  of  prayers  to  Go  Ij 
there  appeared  a  qreat  black  niaiSy  Dogge  :  with  who.n  1  would  nave  nothing  to  do,  but   ex- 
fef^N'ilvaze.     He  (aid,  that !  t  wn^N  hatTe.    We  rebuked  himas  an  Hell-hound,     Aclength  AnUIuVlW 
he  departed,  and  Na.vage  a^p^iared  ;  but  bri^^hter  then  to  day.  Wickedfpirir. 

Nal H  me  yo' thofe  th  nT^i  I  told  y  I'ttoday? 

A.    We  have  them  in  record  and  miude. 

Nal. Read  them 

A.    1  did  read  thtm. 

H.  K-  HclaugScth,  ha  ha,ha.&c«  a  great  laughter  =  He  hath  alfo  a  Ta- 
bic, but  (cemcth  nor  co  belike  the  former  Table  of  NalDa^e^  There  arc 
tcn,or  e'cvc  ^  divifions  in  this  Table,  as  was  not  in  the  former  Tabic. 

^   A     If  thou  art  Nalvage,  proceed  in  the  Doftrine  of  wifdom,  if  thou  art  not  Nalvage,  depart 
yin  the  name  of  felus. 

i  bi-'ve  fr.  e  will,  and  therefore  I  will  be  here. 

A.   Now  I  doubt  nofhincr,  but  thou  art  a  deceiver,  l^udite:'}  The  ignorance  of  the  wicked  . 
becometii  duir :  which  fhewing  it  felf  is  fwcpt  ou:  of  doors,  and  thrown  on  the  Dung-hills.         ,1 

E.  K    Now  appearcih  ore  like  inc  iVd/v.i;^. 

^^' •  E2/f«i"o  ^  it  of  the  [  ]  for  thou  bxji  opened  thy  blafphewy  :  and  being  difco- 

vered,  art  become  more  acxurfed :  Therefore  brcapf,  ihon  art  accurfed,  ,ho^  art  not  di<rnified  ;  bnt 
become  a  Velfel  of  unquity  :  And  therefore  hall  no  frec-wUl.     For  ,  free-will  either  I ,  or  is  in  Fxc  will. 
jtate  to  be  dignified.         Jherejore,  as  dut  I  fweef  thee  out :  uvd  ca-e  ihee  into  that  i  indjill  ,  which- 
it  tbe  place  of  the greateji  woe:  the i^ungbiU,  and  the  nward  oj  the unrighteom.        And,  becaufe 

thou 


vovcc  aa 
the  one  fiJc. 


78       A  true  'J^clation  of  D'.  Dee  his  jBions  \vithjpirits,  6c c. 


thou  hjji  thrufi  thy  felf  into  the  Judgements  of  the  Lord  :  and  haji  heard  the  fecrets  of  the  Almighty : 
Ihcrefore  I  feal  thee  tanqiiam  ti  uncus  in  lufemum. 

E-  K-  Heftrikcch  him  with  an  yern,  like  a  pair  of  tongs,- in  form  of  a 
MouU  to  call  Pellets  in  :  griping  his  brain  and  underchaps,  and  fo  he  fell 
down  and  difjppcared  •  and  in  his  place  came  N^alip.ige- 

S.  K.  Nalvage  maketh  curfie  toward  the  four  quarters  of  the  world. 

Nal., c/l'/j  Us*/  ij)  good  at  thy  Um. 

"  E- 1"^.  In  his  heart  though:  that  it  might  be^  that  noi^one  VeYilmaflered an- 
Ofh^r^  and  thereupon  faid  Z^m- 

E.  K-  He  is  now  accounting  again  on  his  Table  as  he  did  before- 

Nal.  .....  Vrito  this  Voarine  belongeth  the  perfeCr  kno-^-ledge^  and  remembrance  of  the  viydicall 

/\  Ftne         Creatures.       How  therefore  Jhall  I  inform  you,  which  k^noiP  them  not? 
Chaa'his.  A.   Mcitn  you  zi  Babyon  Boborel,  Sec. 

Nal.  ■.,... The  Cbaradcrs^or  Let:ers  of  theTables.  - 

A.  You  mean  the  myftical  Letters  ?  wherein  the  holy  book  is  promifecf  to  be  written  :  and 
if  the  book  be  fo  written  and  laid  open  before  us  ,  and  then  you  will  fioni  Letter  to  Letter 
point,  and  we  to  record  your  inftruftions :  Then  I  truft  we  fhall  fufficiently  underfiand  ,  and 
learn  your  inftruftions. 

Nal Alfo  in  receiving  of  the  calls',  this  is  to  be  noted  :  that  they  are  to  be  uttered  of  me,backj- 

PicW.ird.       ward  :  and  of  you,  in  praciife,f.rward. 

'1  hefecalls,  A.    I  underftand  it,  for  the  efficacity  of  them  ;  c\fe,  all  things  called  would  appear  :  and  fo 

hinder  our  proceeding;  in  learning. 

Nal. VPCE7ETRSMSSS 

24.  E  S  A  I  I  M  M  N  S  E    S. 

E'  K,  All  this  was  in  one  lincj  in  the  lowermoft  portion  •  and  lowermoft 
line  thereof. 

Nal IE   E£   E   TNOEVMElMMM 

27.  MMTi  M  A    E  7  S  E  AM. 

e-  K  Now  he  ftandeth  ftill. 

43.  Nal AEKTISANSSEASDMMSEAOA 

Eviiii.  viiiiAOAOiivirsEirr 

S  D  A   I  N. 

E-  K-  Thefe  leemed  to  be  taken  out  of  divers  lines ,  in  the  three  lone:. 
portions  5  but  none  oucof  the  uppermoft,  or  fourth- 

Nal...;..  R  S  H   D  D  S  R   RESOLSNREREE 
S  F  R   H    EIEEEEIEEOETISOE 

RttHDEOISEOESMETFEVE  ( 

81.  ^SEEEEERSESEORSMEt 

V.R.  F    E  VETSEEERSE 

X  E  E  R 

lorF.  S  I  S  E  H    E  N  0  E  S  M  E  F  S  F  E   E  D  I  \_^^-^  0  E 

[ll  SSSISEOESHE 

^^^  ^SDFTEIEORSOEDHTEr 

Wherefoevcf  0  E  S  H   E  0    7RTERE0EHSER 

)^    '  jjtrnddhvn. 

lie  reft  of  this  Leffon,  the  next  morning. 

A.    After  the  correaing  of  certain  places  before  in  the  Letters  he  faid.        I  feel  no 
more,  . 

A.   Thanks  and  honour  be  to  the  highe/1  for  ever,       Amn. 


Fry  day  morning,  Hora  8  i.  Apr  His  i^.  Cracovi^. 

Not  long  after  my  Invitation,  Nahage  appeared,  Nutu  Dei. 

Nal Oir  peace,  which  is  Triumphing  patience,  and  glory  be  amongji you. 

A.    Amen, 


Nal. .:...  It 


J  true  Relation  of  D%  Dee  his  AUtons  mth  fptnts,  dcc^        y^ 

Nal.  ....•  It  way  he  faidy  can  there  be  patience  in  the  Angels^  which  are  exalted  above  the  aire  .<*  . 
For,  fi^<:h  as  were  of  errour  have  thetr  reward  :  lea^  forfooth  my  dear  brethren.  For  there  is  a.  P*'"^*"^^ 
continual  fight  between  us  and  Satan,  M'i<'rei«w<'i"i«9?#//^  by  -patience.  Tbii  if  not  fpokfn  vitk- 
tut  a  caiife  :  For  at  the  Vevil  is  the  father  of  Carping ,  fo  doth  he  futtlely  infeU  the  Seers  imagina- 
xioH,  mingling  unpeifeft  forms  with  my  utterance  :  Jf^ater  is  not  received  without  aire  ,  neither 
the  vord  of  God  without  blafphemom  infinuatien.  The  fon  of  God  never  did  convert  all.,  neither  did 
all  that  did  hear  him,  believe  him.  Therefore,  where  the  power  of  God  is,  is  alfo  Satan  :  Lo  ,  I 
(peah^not  this  without  a  caufe,for  I  have  anfwered  thy  infe&ion. 

A.  E.K.    Had  thought  that  Angels  had  not  occafion  of  any  patienccjand  fo  was  his  thought 
anfvvcred. 

Nal I  fittde  the  Soul  of  man  hath  no  portion  in  this  firft  Table.     It  is  the  Image  of  the  fon  ^he  firft  Tt- 

of  God,  in  the  bofome  of  hit  father,  before  all  the  worlds.       It  comprehetideth  his  incarnation,  taf-  ^^^' 
Ron,  and  return  to  Judgement :  which  he  himfelfj  in  &c{h,k.nowetb  not  i  all  the  rejt  are  of  underjtand-  ^  jy      '" 
tng.   The  cxaft  Center  excepted. 

A   (Two  thoufand  and  fourteen,  inthefixth  Table^is)  D 

S6.     7003-  I^  f^f  thirteenth  Table, is  I. 
A     In  the  21*^.  Table.  114.06  downward. 

I      In  the  lajil able,  one  lejfetb^n  Number.        A  word,  J*\dz you  Jhallmierfiand,  what  that 
word  is  before  the  Sun  go  down.    Jaida  is  the  laji  word  of  the  call. 

85.     H  49.  afcendingT  ^9.defceHding,  A  909.  direHlyyO  fimp!y, 
H  2029.  dirtilly,  call  tt  Hoach. 

225.    Prom  the  low  angle  on  the  right  fide.       Continuing  in  the.  fame  and  next  f^uare. 

D    225.  [The  fame  Muttber  repeated. 

A    It  the  thirteenth  Table ^  740.  afcending  in  his  fquarc. 

M   The  30  *>.  Table,  1 302 S.  -from  the  low  angle  in  the  left-fide^ 

g< In  the  fquare  afcending. 

Call  it  Mid. 

O  The  7<h.  T^ble,  99.  afcending. 
C   7he  \9*'defceMdiMgi^09. 

O  The  ..•  !•  from  the  upper  right  angle,  eroding  to  the  nether  left,  tnd  fo  afcf^ding  too^» 
85,    N  The  ^i^^.  from  the  Center  to  the  upper  right  angle,   and  fo  defcending  ^009 . 
Call  it  Noco. 

Be  patient,  for  I  told  you  it  would  he  tedinuti 
O  The  ^9^^.  from  the  Center  defcending,  or  the  left  hand,  907 ^> 
D  The  41*.    froft  t*^  Center  afcending,  and  fo  to  the  right  upper  Angle,  27004. 
R  The  43'*'.  fr'mthe  upper  left  Angle  to  the  rights  and  fojiillin  the  Circumference,  3400^^ 

I    The  47'^  afcending,  72000. 
82,     In  the  fame  Table  defcending  the  laji* 

Call  it  Zirdo. 

P   The  6*''.  afcending  109. 

A   The  9'*'.  afcending  405. 
81.     L  The  xV^.  defcending  60^.  ...... 

Call  it  Lap.  A.  Her,  he  ftrokc  the  Table  on  Saturday  aftlon  fol- 

lowing at  my  reading  over  of  it  backward, 

E   The  6'''.  from  the  right  Angle  uppermoji  to  the  left,  700. 

G  The  1 5  th-  defcending^  2000. 

R  The  17'''.  from  the  Center  downward,  11004. 

80.     O  The  3  2th.  defcending  from  the  right  Angle  to  the  Center,  3200*. 

Z  47'''.   ic^^ooo.  defcending.  Call  it  Zorge.   [Of  one  fyllable^ 

A  19'*!.  from  the  left  corner  defcending,  I'jiOO. 
79.  A  24'''.  from  the  Center  afcending  to  the  left  Angle,  25000. 
Q_,Tif  fa  me  Table  afrending,  3  3  coo. 
Call  it  Q_\  A.        [Tfjree  fyllables  with  accent  oh  the  lafi  A.3 

E  The  fecond  Table,  112  afcending. 

L  The ^.  defcending  %0i\.. 

C  The  1 9^K   Table  defcending  lOi^,      [That  C,  it  called  CMinor.y 

I    The  I  ■^^^.  defcending,  200'y.  T^ji^ 

C  The  J  <i.iK  defcending,  290J.         Call  it  Cicle. 

E.  K.    Now  is  he  kneeling,  and  praying  with  his  Rod  up 

76.     O  The  4*^.  afcending  to  the  left  Augle»  39'^' 

D  The  •^^^.  defcending  S12.  A.  Here  he  ftriketh  agaia 

O  In  the  fame  defcending,  902.        GaU  it  0  D  O.  vn  Saturday. 

N.  The 


8  o       J  true  l^elation  of  D\  Dee  his  JBions  whfp'trtts,  6cc, 


N  T^f  9^^^  descending  804. 

A  T^eii''^  defc ending  20Q'^ 

R  7he    i^'^^  descending '^006. 
N  Tie  16^''  defcending  12004  : 
A  The  20^*"  defcending  17006, 
Z  7/&f  32th  defcending  ^oooO, 

I  give  it  fafler  unto  you-,  than  1  received  it. 


75 

M 


,.  This  A  may  be  anAorOH  O. 

be  correUed  it  M. 
Zamran. 
Call  it  Zanran. 

E.  K.  thought  it. 


7+ 


73. 


72 


T  The  1^^^  defcend'ngiii    This  may  he  T  or  T). 

O  The  6'''  afc ending  from  the  center  to  the  left  corner  1907. 
Call  It  OD  or   OT. 


A    Ti^c-  9*''  afc  ending  500 
C  77j^  lO^'i  defcending  doi 


C<z//  zr  C  A,      [a.  twofyllahlei .  ]  ^ 

E  mtifl  come  after  R  .'  but  vpithout  mmher^ 
andfo,  it  is  Zacarc. 


R  7i{if  \6^^  afcending  22006. 

A  T/jf  1 9'*^  defcending  23012, 

C  jT/Jjf  30*''  afcendtng  30006. 

A  T^f  39'''  /row  f^e  /f/r  angle  defcending  4201 2. 

Z  The  46  ''■  afcending  3 1 2004.  C/z//  tl  Zacar. 

Vfeyour  time  of  refrejhing^  and  return         Deo  gratias  f eddamus  Immortales, 


The  fame  Friday  after  Noon,  circa  3.  horam. 

After  a  fhort  requeft  made  by  hie  to  Chrift  for  wifdom,  and  verity  to  be  mlniftcred  by 
Nalvage  ;  he  appeared  and  fpake  much  to  E.  K.  which  he  expreffed  not  to  me  :  but  a  length 
confefled  that  he  gave  him  brotherly  counfel  to  leave  dealing  as  an  Idolater  or  Fornicator 
againft  God,  by  asking  counfel  of  fuch  as  he  did. 

E.  K.  confefled  that  he  had  been  that  day,  and  fome  daycs  before,  dealing  by  himfelf  after 
his  manner,  tounderftand  5f  my  Lord  Laskje^  and  of  other  matters  of  Laskji,  and  left  hi* 
queftions  in  his  window  written.  Nalvage  told  him  the  devil  had  now  taken  away  hisque- 
luons.    E.  K.  went  down  to  fee  if  it  were  true,  and  he  found  it  true. 

Nal fray  A,  We  prayed. 

There  is  an  error  in  the  lafl.^  not^in  the  Number-,  but  in  the  Letter-  I  will  firfl  go  through  the 
Letters.,  and  after  come  to  the  Numbers.        How  many  words  haveyot*  received  thit  day  ? 

L,  Thu  teen,  whereof  laida  was  faid  to  be  the  laft  of  the  call. 

f^d\», ...,., They  be  more  worth  than  the  Kingdom  of  Pohnd.  Be  patient,  for  the fe  things  are 
wonderful. 

N  (  The  number  mufi  needs  go  to  )  thefixth,  defcending  309. 

A  The  7'''  afcending  360. 

71  O  The  9^^  afcending  1000. 

O  Ihe  1 3*''  afcending  I050. 

V  The  ij^  afcending  2004.     It  is  Vboaft,     It  may  be  founded  Vaoan. 


Adde  thofe  lajl  Numbers 
A,  '     ^ 


Vooan  is  (po^en  with  them  that 
faf.'i  but  Vaoan  with  them  that 
are^  and  are  glorified.      The 
devils  have  loft  the  dignity  of 
their  founds. 


Ltfit  pi*  «• 
rum  magr.jt 
'^rdjeSiami. 


A.  They  make  472^. 

Nal It  iscalledtke  Myjiical roote  inthe  highefi  afcendent  of  tranfmutation. 

A.  Thefe  phrafes  are  dark  }  when  it  fliall  pleafe  God  they  may  be  made  plain. 
Nal.  ......  It  is  tbefquare  of  the  Fhilofophers  worl{f 

•A.  you  faid  it  was  a  roote. 

Nal So  It  is  It  rootefquare. 

A.  The  fquare  thereof  is  22306729.,.. 

The  roordis^  by  interpret ation^lgnxi  \eiz  mater.       The  vain  Fhilofephers  ds   think,, 
leget  bodies :  but  in  truths  it  conceiveth,  and  bringeth  forth, 
qo         D  the  fifth)  afcending,  4. 

O  the  39,  afcending)  7806.  c<i///t  O  D.  [  A,  drawing  the  0  long,  ] 

E 


! 


it  doth 


i    17 


—  I  -■    ■    ■  I    -^ '■-■■''  ,   ■      .      ■  ■  ,     ,.    ,      .--  .r^— —- , 

J  true  Relation  of  D\  Dee  his  JBions  mth  /pints,  6cc^        8i 


E  L    17  (not  17  thefirfiy  hut  17  and  thethirdtb  :  ftr  it  is  of  the  thirdtb  :    and  ty  it 

L  et         may  be  of  the>7i  both  )  afcendittg,  419. 

69   O    O  the  18  afcending  2017  ....  this  O  niuji  be  founded  as  A. 

T    M     M  the  24  from  the  center  to  the  left  angle,  afcending, 
'yoSp  ....  T  mujibe  inftead  of  M. 

L     A     A    $0  defrending,  ^012. 

A      I      I  f/-'^   35  afcending,  15079. 

B      P     P  the  ^■^^  from  the  center  to  the  left  ang'e^  defcendingi')9o6S.  Avetfcd. 

Call  it  Piamo  cl.         It  it  Piatel  Baltale  to  be  founded. 

As  the  ear  is  the  chief  fenfe  ;  fo,  being  infeded,    it  is  the  greatefi  hindrance.     Manjr  there  be  j^ote  Intrii. 
that  thruft  themfelves  between  yon  and  me  :  and  they  are  increafed.     Power  is  given  agairt  ders. 
to  the  Shew  Scone ;  and  thou  (halt  not  be  hindred. 

A.  Shall  I  prefently  bring  it  forth  > 

Nal -^s  thou  wilt. 

A.  I  brought  forth  the  Stone,  and  it  feemed  niarvelloufly  brighter  than  before  it  was  wont 
to  appear. 

5.  K-  He  fcemeth  to  pray- 

E.  K.  There  appeareth  to  me  in  the  Stone  SHicbael  as  he  was  wont 
to  appear ,  with  his  fword  in  his  hand ,  and  in  a  long  white  gar^ 
mcnt/  ^c. 

Mich I  ant  the  firength  of  the  Higbeji,  and  the  tnighty   arme  of  him  that  is  Almighty  : 

yotir  fellow  fervant,  and  the  mejfager  of  the  Higheji :     The  fewer s   of  the  earth  have  rifen  up  '^-  ^  ,  , . 

eainU  jou:     But  you  fliall  prevail,  and  this  Doftrine /hall  be  delivered    as  is  promifed,  and    -r  n!' m  1"^°" 
*  !•  •  .»  /I  I        r      r         I         fill        r-    M        71-1  )1  /»•   I    miielhaH  be 

according  unto  time.     But  pray  earnejtly  i  for  lo,  the  whole  hojte  of  Angels,  juch  as  are  blefjed,  ^^^iQ^^-^^^^ 

have  cry ed  unto  the  Lord_,  fay tngi  Not  fo  Lord  :   Thy  bread  is  torn  in  pieces  ,  or  reproachfully 

eaten. 

Thuf  therefore  faith  the  Lord,  Be  patient,  for  the  place  is  holy,  and  the  power  of  the  Higheji 
if  amongli  you.     Receive  willingly  :  for  he  that  is  offended  is  fmitten.     Be  '^"^'f"^^^^' ^^'^  ^^'Thcdi  tu^ci' 
jpare  of  deceivers  :    for  the  power  of  the  wielded  is  increafed,   and  is  become  mighty  :    But  into  don  of  the 
this  veffel  fliall  enter  no  unclean  thing,  not  for  this  time  onely,  but  for  ever.  Scone. 

Vnto  thee  Nalvage  tbui  faith  the  Lord,  gather  up  thy  wings  and  enter  :    Do  as  thonart  com- 
ittanded,  and  be  multiplied.     Be  comforted ;  for  Gabriel  fliall  afcend  and  fland  before  the  Lord,  Be  multiplied; 
and  fhall  have  power  and  defcend  :  and  he  fhall  be  yoJ{ed  utito  thy  loynes,  and  thou  Jhalt  become  Gabriel, 
utightj  ;  that  thou  may  ft  open  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  with  power. 

?   E  2C,  Now  is  N^/Vrfi"^  come  into  the  Stone. 

Mic Be  comforted,be  comforted,  be  comforted  my  brethren  in  the  God  of  Hofis  :    for  your 

comfort  is  and  fhall  be  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.     Therefore  let  peace  be   amongft  you,  and  be  no  more  T^^  ^°V 
labes;  for  wifdom  dweHeth  not  amongli  children.     The  peace  of  God  be  amongft  you  :  And  tkia^      ' 
much  I  have  comforted  y  oil' 

E.K.  f/eisgone. 

iS-  K-  Nowhere  is  another, 

A.  It  is  Gabriel  thzt  came  to  Daniel. 

Gabr 1  didfo,  and  I  am  that  Gabriel,  and  the  IForld  hearetb  witneffe  of  my  coming. 

Tou  rehcUiotii  wi/}des,yqu  deceivers  of  therighteous,you  nakjd  fuhliances  and  things  lighter  than 
the  vindes,  \now  not  you  that  the  God  of  your  creation  hath  rewarded  you,  kjtow  you  not  your  own 
weakjteffet  know  you  not  your  ftate  of  no  return  ?  I  fay  headlong  you  all  (  without  refiftance  )  fall 
down  to  your  places :  Be  gone,  fmkj,  for  I  am  of  power,  and  do  prevail. 

Behold  he  hath  placed  darknefTe  behind  him,and  hath  made  the  lights  of  heaven  as  ths  Lamps 
i>fhif  beatify.  Go  you  that  are  confcunded  without  return  ;  for  the  name  of  our  God  in  his  de- 
termination is  invincible.  S\  vi. 

This  night  is  a  Sabbath,and  afcoiirge-to  tie-wicked. 

Nal I  promifed  to  expoundyou  a  word,  the  firflyouhadto  day,hfitthe  Idft.  tt  fignifiethj 

of  the  Higheft. 

^t.  E.  K-  HisTabIc  now  appeareth  very  evidently  to  me,  as  that  I  could 
paint  it  all.  ^^  , 

..    Ceafe  for  this  time,  for  it  is  a  timeoffilence,  for  the  wielded  are  confounded  :  in  the  morning 

^arly you  jliall  be  taught  plentifully  :  for  my  power  is  become  a  hundred  and  fifty  ;   and  I  willfinijh     Note, 

my  charge,  long  before  the  time  appointed. 

Gabr.  We  are  alwayes  prefent  until  the  pronvfe  he  ended.      Kefi  in  pedce. 

E-  K.  Gabriel  Icerr.eth  to  be  all  in  compleat  karnejjey  like  skaks  of  a  Fifi  from 
i  M  the 


. ---  --  ,  — — -    ■  -  -     I         ■ 

S'  2       A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  jBions  whff'mts,  dec. 
^"^'^^^^^'^^'^^thearm-Utsdo'^Dn'^ardi  with  a  Spear  in  his  band,   all  of  fire,  about  a   two 

o'iOtbnel  at  1  '  •*  ' 

this  occafion.  yards  loHg. 

A.    The  peace  of  God,  and  Iiis  mercy,  be  on  us  now  and  ever.      Ameyi. 
A.   I  fit  fliould  not  offend  you,  I  would  glady   ask   youi  knowledge  of  the  Lord  ^/^frt 
L(r.t/^/f-Our  great  worldly  friend,  and  that  for   the  fervicc  of  God,    if  he  be  paft  the  chief 
danger  of  his  prefenc  intirniity,  e>f. 
,       ».  .....  Jf'''he>t  we  enter  into  hiMyWe  kjiow  hint  ;    hut  fro'»  him,   he  is  fcarce  kjtowHmito  us  :  as  ef 

'  ^"^^"^^      /„-,,j  of  whom  it  ii  f'lid,  lie  hatli  confcnced  with  an  Harlot  :    we  kjtow    not  the  end  of  God  his  ju~ 
jiice  which  is  vfon  him. 

liii  prayers  are  come  to  thefecond  heaven^  wither  hath  any  received  remembrance  of  him  :   But 
■we  will  fray  unto  God  to  be  merciful  unto  hiiity  and  that  for  thy    fake  j    Becaufe  thou  Jhalt  not  be 
niadealauglnng-ftock  to  tiie  wicked.     Fray  thou  fo,-  him,  that  tfesH  »;<?>:// work  in  him  that 
Tiaycr   or       ^^jjIj,),  j^j.  ^orketh  not  for  h''>ifelf.      Hold  up  thy  hands  for  him  ;  for  it  is  a  lawful  and  a  cha- 
ritable thing:   For  God  hath  granted  thee  a  force  in  prayer:    But   be  ^Mient  and  hmnb/e. 
Go,!  his  gift  to  f^e  with  thee,  give  thankj  and  laud  u)ito  the  Lord. 
Ain;)r«ycr.  Ceafe. 

A.  LaudesDeo  noftro  incelFanter  reddantur.         Amen. 


^zt\nAzy,Aprilis  iJf't  CMane.  Cracoviae,  1584. 

A.  Orationc  Dominica  tinita,  &  brevi  illaoratione  Pfalmi  33.  infpefto  Chryftallo  apparu- 
cre  utrique  G^ir/c/ 8c  Malvage. 

E.  K-  They  kneel,  a^  chough  they  were  in  confeilion  one  to  another, 
and  •  •  • .  about  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 

Gabr ')  after  me. 

.0  legimting  and'fountain  of  all  wifdom,  gird  up  thy  loines  in  mercy^andjhadcw  our  weaktteffti 
"V""-  t  ^^  wcrciful  unto  uf,  and  forgive  us  our  trefpaffes  :  for  thofe  that  rife  up  faying  there  is  no  God,  have 
rifen  up  againfl  us,  faying.  Let  us  confound  them  :  Our  jirength  is  not,  neither  are  our  tones  full  of 
jnnrrow.  Help  therefore  0  eternal  God  of  mercy  :  help  therefore  0  eternal  God  of  falvation  : 
help  therefore  0  eternal  God  of  peace  and  comfort.  If' ho  is  likje  *'nto  thee  in  altars  of  incenfe  ? 
before  whom  the  ^'ire  of  Heaven  fing,  O  Mappa  la  man  hallelujah  ;  Vifit  u  OGod  with  a  com- 
prehending fire,  brighter  than  the  Stars  in  the  fojirth  heaven.  Be  merciful  unto  us,  and  continue 
with  us  j  for  thou  art  Almighty  :  To  whom  all  things  of  thy  breafts  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  futg 
glorypratfe  andhontur.  Saying,  Come  ,   Come,  Lord   for  thy  mercy  fake.  Say  fo  tmtoGod 

kjteeling. 

A.  I  repeated  it,  kneeling,  and  £.  K,  likcwife  kneeling. 

E.K-  They  both  kned  down  again,  and  put  their  foreheads  together.* 
Crd^nViiecmeth  to  fitm  a  chair  on  the  one  fide  ot  N<j/v<j^e  about  30 
yards  ofF^  on  NallPdge  his  left  hand-      Nd/i>/?^dllindcth. 

-.  Ihiu  faith  the  Lord,  JFho  is  be,  that  dare  reft,:  invincible   jirength:  SeaU  uptheEaJl, 

lUnding  J-     /<■"/<*  "P  '^-'^  South,  Scale  up  the  fFeji ;    and  unto  the  North  put  three  Scales. 

^"■'  E.  K-  Now  (ittethN<a/'P^^<?inaChair  afidc  from  his  round  Table,  the 

Table  being  fomewhat  before  him* 

Nal Name  that  I  point  to.  [^  To  E.  K.  he  faid  fo,  as  concerning  the  Letters. 

E-K-  He  flung  like  a  thin  brightnefle  out  of  the  Scone  upon  £.  K.  he 
hath  his  rod,  which  he  took  out  of  his  own  mouch. 

, .  .ey .. .  He  holdeth  up  his  rod,  and  faith,  I  am  all  joy,  and  rcjoyccin 
my  felf 

E-  K-  He  fniit  the  round  Tabic  with  his  rod;  and  it  whirled  about  with 
agreatfwiftntfTe-  Now  that  which  before  fccmed  to  be  a  circular  and 
G  obe.  plain  form,  appcarcth  to  be  a  Globe  and  round  Ballj  corporal ,  when  it 
turncth. 

Nal SaythelajL 

A.  Piamo  el, 

£.  K-  He 


^true  Relation  of  I>.  Dee  bis  y^icris  ffith  fpiritSy  &:c.  8  j 


E- K,  He  Itnkech  the  Tabic  now,  and  though  the  body  Iccm  to  turn,  yet 
the  Letter  Teem  to  ftand  rtill  in  their  places, 

'^ifi.K-  "bJow  he  pluckcth  out  five  Books,  as  if  fiom  under  his  Chair,  and 
fctteth  them  down  by  him  ;  the  books  be  green  ,  bright ,  and  they  be  three 
corned,  ^aclalp- 

Si!. .... .  Re  J  J  hckjvjrd  ...  [to  E.  K.]  Eifrj  tbiHg  witb  m  teacbelb.  Read  bjckjuird. 

Letrtr  wttbcLt  numbrr. 

Kal Rejdhackvird-i  letter  without  number,  rk  letters  tbou  badji  jejierdaj, 

£i.  After  all  read,  he  proceeded  thus : 

P  J'-.'f  fourth  jfcendin^y  97. 
A  Tiv'  fixtb  afcettdingj  1 1 2. 
^S  I    Tbfet^btbafcendixgyZoj. 

P    The  Kn:th  ifceniing,  por,  P  I  A  P. 

E-  K-  Nowhcl^ikethijacrain.anditturnerh- 

i'  J  TA.  '• 

lie  tvtmhers  after. 
I 

,         A.  A  A  I»  Jbe  firji  A  maj  be  g»  .\  an  O  ^r  £hE, 

Tbofe  are  two  words, 

E.  K.  Now  he  ftriketh  again,  and  rurncth  ■  his  Rod  feemeth  to 
be   hollow  Jikc  a  Reed- 

65  A  P  G  O  B.  Call  it  Bogpa. 

E.  K'  GMel  falleth  down  on  his  face  ]  and  lieth  proftratc,and 
Kalyj^e  holdeth  up  his  Rod  all  the  while. 

'jift        DOS-  He  pointed  beyond  him  in  the  upper  Circle,    itfeemah 
T      like  a  Roman  C, 

^  L  A  M  A  O  p.  Foamal  Od.  ptt  out  tbe  S. 

hlak,e  tt  tTfc  vr:rds, ...'..  It  may  he  all  one  word  with  S.  <r  T.  but  it  would  be  btri 
for  jovr  JotderjiiiHd'.ng. 

CMahj  *  P*'^^  hctweeK  Poamal  and  Od, 

E,  .K.  §4^?/ lieth  pro  Urate  all  this  nhile. 

ij  X  V  D  M  O  Z.  C^lL  It  Zorae.  ,  * 

With  great  difficultj  tbis  Letter  wm  difcerntd  :  Nai  vage  bintfelffaidj  be  kj!(W 

it  not  jet;  but  It  feemed  to  E.  K.  to  he  an\.  Nalvage  denied  it  to  he  an  \. 'hud 
faid  be  kjtew  not  yet  tbe  mj^iery  :  fay  tbe  Lords  prayer,  f.r  T  cannot  cpot  tt.  AhLiugb 
my  power  be  multiflted,yet  I  kj:cw  not  this  Letter.        At  length  he  faid  it  vjs  V, 

£.  K.  I  can  remember  that  word  well. 

Na] Tboufralt  not  remember  it. 

62  PEV.  It  ii  called  Vep. 

(JHaks a  ptint  tbere.  ^-   A  full  point?        Kal NojMOy  a  jhol^, 

it  OLOHOL.  Crf///r  Loholo. 

lA»gy  tbe  ftrjl  fyllahle  accented. 

€•  K-  Now  he  ftriketh  the  Table- 
go  S  D.  f  It  is  the  uppermri  of  Call  <f  D  S, 

59  S  I  M  x'X  P  I.  Pror.ownce  it  1  P  A  M  I  S.  (J\ial{e  a  ptint  at  S.tif  h  pt.- 

jwuedjacrt. 

58  LU.  Call  it  UL.  A.  With  fuch  found  to  U.as  wcpronounce 

R'l  '  .yew ,  whereof  bows  aic  made. 

':  Ms  MAPI 


84         A  trueReUtion  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBmsmthfpirits,  5cc. 


57       -MAP  I.  E-  K-  It  fcemcth  to  be  an  e. 

XabiJs  claufiSj  [^Span]  [itm  um\  ...  He  hummed  iffce^figmfyihg  two 
vordi  morey  which  were  not  to  be  fronQunced  till  tktj 
vere  read  in  fraciife, 

[)  O.  O  D.  Aijouhtd  before. 

E.  K-  Now  Qamel  rifeth  from  his  lying  proftratc- 

56  HOT  LAB.  Ctf//itBALTOH.  Tber*  k  *  ftiitt, 

P  A  1  P.  Can  it  Piap. 

E-  K.  G;i^r/V/ fteppsth  up,  and  fecmcth  to  ftorm  angerly  agalnfl 
fomewbat, 

^k.  Belike  fome  wicked  powers  would  intrude  their  illufions ,  or  hindrances  in  thcfi 
actions. 

E.  K.   He  hath  thrown  his  Dare  from  him :  and  ic  cometh  to  hin 

again. 

""Gabr Co->^nt  the  number  of  the  words  you  hive  received  to  day, 

L.  Sixteen,  if  Poaw^r/i    O-/ be  made  two  words. 

Gab Bf  j-ackjugy  and  jo  matiy  flaguet  it  amottgiljou  rmre  then  jiur  flagut  woi  hefore^ 

E-2C-  Hcleemcthtoftormftill- 
cJai C;-''.'?  in. 

£.  K.  Now  there  come  four  more. 

Gab Art  not  tkou  Adnminl  iVhich  haiifaUcit.,  and  hafi  hurt  thy  neck,  fcxr  timet?  A» 

vilt  thou  >.'?»•  rrfe  agajn^  and  take  fart  anew  ?       Go  thy  way  therefore,  tbov  Seducer ^  enter    tut 
ihf  fifth  r:rw?fjrr.   Let  thy  p  wer  he  lefetben  it  ity  ty  a  mvch  a  thiuCeeji  namhtr  here. 

E-K.  NowthcyalHour  falldownm[oapic,orH/4/»Mof  the  foundaLifli 
ofthe  place  where  they  i^ood. 
E-  K.   N^hage  licth  all  this  vrhilc  upon  hii  face. 

Gab Couxt  Hiw  again. 

A.  *^ir:eea. 

Gab  ....  It  it  ifot  fo.    there  it  »H  erreur. 

Nal.  .....I  am  deceived  jram  Ipaou 

O  D  the  next  it  falfe^  and  fo  are  the  rei  :  A>td  fo  it  that  that  f*ilsmtib, 

A  B  O  S.  S  O  B  .^ 

A.   lhaiB^/r:t. 

Nal. .in:!  Piap. 

Nal.  ..,.  What  is  tkitf  [to  E.  K.]  E.  K...  ...G. 

Nal Kti  it  is  a*  H, 

S5  HOT.  T  O  H. 

there  w  a.  ftixti  jbelfinl  *  .r^Vj  it'.'-ei  Virjula. 

54  MOH.  HOM. 

55  SD.  DS. 

52  .         L I P  D  A  I.  C€BitlhDV\L  t::eKt  ad. 

51  O  N  O  G.  CU  it  GoDo. 

Gab. .....  f^(*ve  HCt^ftr  the  flttt  wtxetb  msrt  bi.yt 

N'^ Fti^etb  S.D.  D  S.    tkts  wxctrrtSeimUml^ftOfwimg  ft 

r«4  macb. 

E.  K-  Cjhriel  did  throw  a  brighrnelTeupon  E.  K.  after  he  had  fti>- 
ked  his  own  face  drfi ,  EJC.  frarted  at  it. 

49   azr:z 


J  true  Relation  of  I>.  Dee  his  J&icns  mtb  fpirits,  (5cc»        8  ^ 

49       AZRNZ  C-?///t  Zurza.  d..  h^.../.nitrz.a. 

E.  K.  Nalvage  kneclcth  down  before  the  TaMe,  and  ufeth  many  in- 
clinations,and  gefturcs  ofrevcrencejas  Priefts  ufe  to  do  atfte  Alter. 
48      M  Z  R  A  F:  F  A  R  Z  M. 

47        H  A  L  I P  m$re<K>er  P    I  L  A  H-  7bree  fjUahles.  ly  pronoun- 

cod  bj  it  •*]!„ 
46       HAND  A  I       the  ArK^fkitTifUige         lADNAH.  Ijadnch. 

E.  K'  Nahage  cometh  and  kiffctii  the  Tabic  and  kneelcth  down, 
and  fcemeth  to  pray. 

45      MRE  wttb  ERM 

44  B  A  C  a  Rod  CAB 

£.  iC.  He  kneeleth  down  again5and  ufeth  fuch  gcfturesas  before. 

GSN  arod 

E.  K.  Nal'va^e  faid,  Adjwva  »/e,  0  mi  Dejfs.  He  holdeth  up  liia 
hand  and  kifleth  the  Table,  and  ufeth  wonderful]  reverence.  He  faitla 
again.   Fer  ofem^  0  mi  Detts. 

45  E  R  N  OZ  delivered jtm  Z  OK  R  E  N  S  G 

42  SD  mndt^whiek  DS 

41  R  I  P  the  holj  imt  Pir,  then  is  a.  ^int 

40  ABAC  gevem  Cdl  it  Caba. 

3f      ALEROHO,  Zwiiiftf«L-nr  C^// it Ohorda, i 

Nil There  k  a.  flof,  JhevpiKg  a  jhfli^e  nuie  Jhaight 

dowH  tbm\ 

38       M  R  A  S  A  C    n  vhim  Cafann  j  t  fi^, 

£.  K.  Now  he  kiffeth  the  Table  again. 

37       MASRG  wnb  idmir€tt9n  GRSAM  idfiopttVL 


ft 

M  GarfaaCi 


36       H  E  L  O  B  O     jnvr  Girmenti  O  B  O  L  E  H 

35       S  B  R  U  heautified  U  R  B  S 

34      SD  MndtkWbicb  DS 

E.  K.  Now  he  ufeth  the  former  reverent  gefhires  again. 

33       IDEA  •fg*tbcrnt^  ALDI 

32      EGRP  with  tie  fire  PRGE  ttpiry, 

31       PNONG         Igzrmlktd  ONOND 

Nal, Ai]W3>*  mtf  0  m  Z)<«, 

30      LIHT  fett,  THIL  *fmgthgrei 

29       ABOS  jr4#/ff  30  BA 

4«      ilElZ  •fj.;**^*  ZIEN  heret^m. 

27.   HOL- 


86      A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mthjfirits,  &c. 


27  HO  LB  ON      the  palms  tiobloh. 

26         A  T  ^  ^  t:  A. 

m 
25  H  A  M  M  O  C     trilled  you  together    C  O  M  M  A  H  A  point, 

24         DO  And  As  before  O'D. 

23  ZMIZ  efmyvejiures  Zimz.      A  point. 

22  A  O  H  T  O  N  in  the  ntidji     Notboa.    Here  is  a  point  before  the  word.  A  polnc. 

21  A  AQ_.  jigur  garments  ^A  A.  Three  fyllabj«. 

E.  K.  Now  he  ufeth  reverence  to  the  Table  again. 

20  qaOH  meafureth  HOL^       i^.nsHoIquu. 

,^  SD  which  T>S 

Nal.  Adjuva  me  mi  Deus.  ,  .      ^       ^  , 

i8.  GRPLAM     a  through  thrufiingjire    Malptg^  as  Mdfutg. 

*         '  :'  i 

17         AT  <w  rA. 

Now  he  prayeth  as  before,  his  arms  extended. 

16        AARG  andtheMoon  GRAA.     A  pdnt, 

15         D  hSVZAN  aSword  NAZPSAV. 


E. 

if.  Now  he 

prayeth  again. 

■ 

H 

AT 

ai 

TA. 

13 

r 

i* 

a  word  by  it  felf. 

12 

ROR 

The  Sun- 

R»r.        Here  a  point.' 

XI 

LOZ 

bands 

Zol ...  zod  A,  as  0/:  A  point.      '    * 

so 

ARBOS 

in  Iff  hofe 

Sohra, 

? 

OHPNOy 

of  vrrath 

Vonpbo. 

j8 

ZLAC 

a  hove  the  firmantets  Calz. 

7 

HSNAL 

iu  power  exalted 

LANSU  asLtnJh. 

Adjuva   mt  ODcus. 

6 

TLAB 

ofjujiice 

Salt.   Here  is  a  poinf. 

5 

DAI 

the  God 

iad,  as  lad. 

4 

OHOG 

faith 

GOtTO, 

3 

GSROV 

tverjeu 

Verfg,    Here  a  point. 

2 

FNOS 

Raigft 

Smf, 

j» 

LO 

/ 

Oh            '■--  •' 

k — 

E.  K.  Now 

(tA  true  Relation  of  D^\,  Dee  his  ABions  mthffints,  &c.       8  7 


This  is  the  enddf  theTh.^ftCaii 


E.  If.  Now  he  fittcth  down  in  his  Chair, 
mighty  and  firft  Call. 

Tray  that  jtii  may  uHderjland  what  it  k. 

A.   Mean  yoii  prcfeiitly  ? 

Na! I,prefeMt(y, 

A.  I  pray  to  that  intent. 

E.  K.  All  the  Stone /he weth  fire,  and  all  is  on  lire,  nothing  elfe 
appearing  :  not  like  common  fire,  but  clear,  thin,  d^r. 

Now  it  waxeth  clear. 

E.  K.  And  now  Nahage  is  on  the  top  of  the  Globe,  and  his  feat 
rcmaineth  in  the  former  manner  of  fire.  Now  Nahage  holdeth  up 
his  right  hand,  and  the  fame  feemeth  to  be  many  hands.  There  is  on 
one  of  his  lingers  an  I.  It  vanifheth  away  i  andfoon  divers  fingers  are 
words  as  follow. 


/ 

ReigK 

ever 

you 

faith 

the 

God 

of 

Juftice, 

in 

power 

exalted 

above 

the 

firmaments 

wrath^ 
in 

vphofe    • 
hands 
the 
Son 

ZF 

as 

a. 

Sword:, 

and 

thi 

Moon 

as 

a 

through 

thrujiing 

fire 

rvhich 

vteafureth 

your 

garments 

in 

the 


midfi 

of 
my 

vefiuresy 

and 

trujfed 

you 

together 

as 

the 

palms 

of 
tny 

hands, 

tphofe 

feats 

I 

garniped 

with 

the  60 

fire 

of 
gathering 

and 

beautified 

your 

garments 

with 

admiration 

to 

whom 

I 

mads 

a 

Law 

to 

govern 

the 

holy  ones, 

and 


delivered 
you 
a 

rod 
with 
the 
ark. 

of 
kjiowledgej 

moreover 

you 

lifted 

up 

your 

voices 

and 

/ware 

obedience 

and 

faith 

to 

him 

that 

liveth 

and 

triumpheth 

whofe 

beginning 

is 

not^ 

nor 

end 

can 

not 

he 

which 

finneth 

as 

a 

flame      60 


7M 


S8        A  trueRelation  ofD'.  Dee  his  JBions  mthfpiriti,  dec. 


tn 

the 
midfi 

your 

Palace^ 

and 

raigneth 

amoMgJi 

yoH 

as 

the 

BalUttce 

right  eon f}zejfe 

and 

truth. 


Move 

therefore 

and 

fhevv 

your 

felvcs, 

oppn 

the 

inyfteries 

of 

your 
Creation, 
be 

friendly 
unto 
me--i 
for 


49 


the 

fervattt 

of 

the 

fame 

your 

Gody 

the 

true 

vporjiiippet 

of 

66 

the 

60 

Highefi, 

49 

169 


Second  Table, 

The  covenant 
of  God. 
Obedience. 

Many  kcyes. 


Note   thefe 
three  degrees. 

Faith. 
A  key  of  the 
firil  feven. 
A  Hgn  to  make 
tn  end. 


E.  K.  Now  all  the  fingers  be  gone. 

A. 

Nal It  if  thefenfe  in  your  tongue  of  the  holy  anl  myflical  Call  before  delivtred  :  which 

followeth  mpraSlice  for  themov'mgof  the  CecondTzb\e,  the  Kings  and  Minifters  of  govern- 
ment :  The  uttiance  of  which,  is  of  force,  and  moveth  them  to  vifible  apparition  :  moved  and 
appeared,  they  are  forced  (  by  the  Covenant  of  God  delivered  by  his  fpirit)  to  render  o- 
bedience  and  faithful  fociety.  IFherebt,  they  will  open  the  myfteries  of  their  creation,  as  far 
as  fjadhe  neceffary  :  and  give  you  underftanding  of  many  thoufand  ferrets^  wherein  yen  are  yet 
but  children ;  for  every  Table  hath  his  key  :  every  key  openeth  his  gate,  and  every  gate  being 
opened,  giveth  kjiowledge  of  himfelf  of  entrance,  and  of  the  myjieries  of  thofe  things  whereof  he  if, 
an  inclofi'.re.  yVithin  thefe  Talaces  jou  (hall  find  things  that  are  of  power,as  well  to  fpeaJ{_,  as  to  do. 
for  every  [  (i)  Palace  ]  "  above  his  [  (2')  City]  and  every  City  above  his  [  (3)  entrance.  ] 

Be  you  therefore  diligent  that  you  7nay  enter  in,  not  as  fpoilers,  but  as  fitch  asdeferve  intertain^ 
ment  in  the  name,  and  through  the  power  of  the  Highefl.  For  great  are  the  mercies  of  God  unto 
fuch  as  have  faith.  This  is  therefore  the  key  of  the  firft  feven,  according  to  the  proportion  of  the 
firfi  Creation.  No  tn^re  for  this  time, 

Afign  alwajes  to  maks  an  end, 

E.  K.  He  drew  a  Curtain  before  the  Stone,  of  white  colour. 


*  1  had  dif. 
courfed  fome- 
what  with  E. 
K.  of  the  man- 
ner of  skrim- 
pes. 

Gabr. 

as  1  think* 


E.K.heTpeak. 
eth  hollowly. 


He, 


The  fame  Saturday,  after  Noon,  hora  ^l  ^. 
The  white  Curtain  remained  about  half  an  hour  after  my  piayer  to  God,  and  fome  in- 
vitation to  Gabriel  and  Nalvage,  at  length  the  Curtain  quaked  as  though  wind  blew  ic. 

E  K.  Me  thinkcth  that  I  hear  a  ftir  within  the  Stone.  At  length 
they  appeared. 

E.  K.  .They  have  very  eyes  which  twinkle  as  other  mens  eyes  do, 
and  "  therefore  I  fee  them  with  my  external  eye,  not  within  my  ima- 
gination, as,.... 

T^bere  are  two  hJMd  of  vifions,xhe  onehyinfufmiof  will  and    defcending,  the  otherbyiH- 

fiifion  by  permifjon  and  afcending.  The  firjl  it  the  imagt  -of  the  Will  of  God  defcending  into  the 
body,  and  adjyned  to  the  foul  'of  man,  whofe  nature  is  to  di^iinguifh  things  of  his  own  l^neffe,  but 
fhtit  up  inprifon  in  the  body,  wanteth  that  power;  and  therefore  being  illuminated  iy  fp'ritual 
prefence,  inwardly,  feetb  now  in  part,  as  he  JJ^all  hereafter  do  in  the  whole. 

But  note,  that  every  vifion  is  according  to  the  foal  of  man  in  power  :  and  fo  is  received  of  him 
that  feeth.  The  boy  of  man  feeleth  nothing  fpiritual  ttntil  he  be  of  incorrupt  ion  :  Therefore 
ufeth  no  fenfe  in  aixd  illumination.       The  other  is  to  be  ftund  out  by  his  contrary. 

E.  K.  Here  is  a  Devil  that  deridcth  thefe  in/i:ru(f}ions,  and  faith, 
you  may  know  his  vertue  by  his  wifdom  :  he  never  went  to 
School.  „; 

-i-"i  Gabr....- 


^^true  Relation  ofiy,  Dee  his  JBtons  mth  fpirits,  (3cc-  Sp 

,    Gih,,,.,.Ikj}owvhaihiU:F(,isnifigiiieniom(tprefilihm,butnottotouckhir4.     He  hach     Hois. 
afcended,  and  begotten  him  a  fon,  wherein  the  people  of  the  eaith  fliall  be  accurfed.         As.Pmer  Anti' 
ihofe  that  are  in  fri^onflmt  up  -from  li^it^'and  the  ufe  of  the  day  comprehend  not  a>i^  tking  ybnt  that  '^hrifii.^ 
frbich  eritreth  u»ro  thein  by  'ferniifi6n,'tr  freefvill^f'o  U  the  Soul  ofmmjhut  uf  from  M li^Bti  except 
that  which  eMtrethbji  the  will,  or  fuffi'ance  of  the  hrgheji.  ■■  ■.'/•"';  :    '•" 

But  at  obedience  it  the  tryal  of  dignification  ,  fo  are  the  Cerenmties  appointed-  hy  Qod,  the  Wit- 
tttffes  of  juftifjcatioH.  For  he  that  violated  the  outward  Law  waf  accurfcd  :  'But  the  very  end  of 
%t(tice  to  fadvation  if  the  obedience,  andfubmijjicnofthe  Soul.  How  can  it  he  that  the  earth  and 
elements  Jhallbear  wi^ntffe  dgdin'i  mdn  u/i  ihe  day  of  Judgement  ,  but  in  the  perverfe  ufe  of  thr,>iy 
;ontrary  to  God  his  Comviandments.  He  it  a  flow  School-majier^and  of  fmall  jinderjiandinr.The  wicked 

Gab. Ceafe,fortheconfli£{iff^reat,  and  muji  have  judgement  of  the  Lord.  ■      '^  fpiricfaid, 

Ci,  Sail  I  ;oyn  my  prayers  with  yours  toour  Godj  co  drive  away  this  wicked  fcorner  y  and 
contemner  of  your  miniftery  \ 

Gab Not  fo,  you  know  not  the  fecret  judgements  of  the  Lord  herein.        "ihe  white  Curtain 

^  drawn. 

A,  Deo  Noftro  foUOmnipotenti  fit  omnis  LausljHoaorjGIoria  3  &  imperium  ia 
fecula  feciilomm.     Amen. 


Sonday,   April  is  15.        (JMane  Hor.jl,  r 

After  a  few  prayers  neceflary',  and  invitation  to  Gabriel  and  Nalvage  for  their  inftru- 
dioos. 

....«  Our  infiru&ions  fliall  grow  moft  plentifully  amongft  you.  But  give  place  to  time,  /or  A  voyce  out 
tbif  it  the  voyce  of  the  highefi. ,  Be  holy  and  righteous  in  the  workj  of  your  hands ,  and  keep  al-  of  the  ftone. 
way  es  the  Sabbath  of  your  Redeem'er  Aere<?/r<r  :  For  even  yet,  the  Serpent  it  amongji  m.  For^^'^^'^^^- 
even  yet  the  Serpent  it  amongfi  my  holy  ones,  and  endeavoureth  to  cut  you  afunder.  Therefore  J^  ^"^^"^ 
I  fay  be  holy  even  in  the  workj  of  your  fjands,  for  he  thiiiketh  to  prevail  againft  yoii :  But  let  your  n*  re  us"fun° 
boufesbefwept  clean,  thap  when  the  fpy  e?nreth,  be  finde  nothing  to  feed  on*  der.and  ho- 

A.  We  ceafed  and  gave  our  felves  to  the  Sabbath  :  coafidering,  intending  hence  foreward  P^'** '°  P'^: 
td  vifit  the  Church  and  Aflembly,  to  pray  and  meditate  on  God  his  feryice.  v**^' 

0?o/«Jefus  ChnHiis  efi  Triumphator  contra  mortem  6-  Diabolam  ,I>ominus  Nojier  & 

'•    Veuf  Noiler.      Amen. 


Monday,  15.  Aprilif.       Mane,hora  6.  Cracovix. 

A.  After  a  ftiort  prayer  to  God  for  remiflion  of  fins  ,  and  fending  of  his  graces  ,  and  his 
gpod  Minifters  afligned  for  our  inftru&ions  :  and  for  the  avoiding  away  of  the  great  enemy,?^^ 
who  held  c&nBift  againft  Gahiel^  &c.  The  white  Curwin  appeared  ftill  drawn  before  in 
tAic  ftone  for  an  hour. 

£.  jtf.  There  appcareth  a  face  ftanding  upon  two  Pillars,  the  Cur- 
tain yet  remaining  drawn  :  The  face  is  fiery,  and  hath  very  great  teeth. 
The  Pillars  are  like  Marble  fpotted  gray  ,  and  the  ground  of  the  Pillars 
colour  white.  He  faid,the  works  of  the  higheft  are  become  a  tum- 
bling block,  and  have  entred  into  the  breafls  of  a  woman,and  he  is  be- 
cewoe  angry.  But  when  fhe  think^th  her  felf  happy,  /he  jthall  ftumble, 
wJiere  fhe  would  not,"and  become  forrowfull.  without  comfort. 

E'  K.  This  face  and  Pillars  became  a  great  water  fwelling  upward, 
and  fo  vanifhed  away. 

&-.  After  about  an  hour,  the  Curtain  was  opened.  All  appeareth  aS  before  :  Gabriel  fit- 
terh  in  his  Chair,  and  N^r/f/rge  kneeleth. 

Nal Pray,forthe  mercy  of  God.  A.  I  prayed  divers  prayers  of  God,&  help 

^*Jtfor  tbtu Jfjalt  not  be  heard?  So,  againft  the  wicked  enemy ,yet  prefentj 

■mEfaidyfy  upon  him.  and  molefting  us  as  he  was  permitrtd.; 

A,  This  Devil  rayled  againft  God,  A.  Thy  judgement  light  on  this  wicked 


€ab Move  not,  for  prefence  of  power  is  great. 

Mai.  ..,..  Number  the  words  of  the  firft  Key. 

A»  I  have  counted  them,  and  they  feem  to  be  88. 

^Wi..  »>^  Ihere  are  not  fo  many. 


R.ebel  for  this  blafphemy,0  God, 


t?  87.    A.  Where' 


9  o       A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  JBions  mthfpirUs,  &c. 


87  £k.  Where  havel  mifreckoncd,  I  pray  jrou  ?  Perhaps  Porfwirf/ao^  is  to  be  but  one  word, 

and  fo  are  87.  .^.^-,.^     _^^  ,^ 

E.  if.  There  is  a  great  CrofTe  over  all  the  ftone  that  is  red ;  Not 
onely  over  to  be  Impreffed  through  the  ftone. 

Nal Nftmher  thewords  inthy  own  language. 

£k.  1  have  nunibred  them,  and  they  feeni  to  be  169. 

A.  While  I  numbred  ,  the  great  red  crofle  went  away  :  and  fliortly  after  came  in  again  in<| 
to  the  ftone  as  before. 

Gab Move  not,  for]  the  ^lace  U  holy.      Tou  have  Ziirza  ds  Gono  in  the  Cull:  the  fd  is  toC 

much. 

A.  I  will  then  put  it  out. 

A.  1  finde  Znrs^a.  Aina  ds  Gono, 

Nal That  ds  is  too  much,       IpirayyoUi  whfit  k  then  the  Mtmher  of  them  j  */  ^o»  ihi 

lowed. ^ 

Nal S6. 

A.  Making  alfo  Poamolzod  one  word?  in  that  account > 

Nal Set  down. 


45  • 2 

47  • 2 

48  -  I  •«..  8c> 

49 .  5  you  lifted  upjow  VejeeT,  ' 

50. 2  I..,,  and 

51. .1  i.,..fware 

52. .4  I ,...  obedienct         i             ' 

5  3  , I  a        and 

54 I  ^      t  ....faith                       ^i 

55  ■  —   2  '..,'  102    to *i»J  tbatltvetb    77 

57 2  "ji61 

58,.,— 3 
-59 I 

60 i 

^» 3 

62  __^ 5 

%~2.\       efyour  paUdce 

65, I 

66 2 

67 ^i 

68 ^2 

69 2 

70^ I 

71 I 

72 I 

73 1 

75  • 2         j^rtP  J»tf KT  p/j/f-f 

7^  I 

77  I 

78 -3 

79 4       t^ff  ^  friendly  uat0  m$ 

..  80 ■  I 

8i- 2 

82 2 

83 1 

84 5 

85 3 

86r=::r3 


TaeT' 


J  true  Relation  of  D'..  Dee  bis  JBions  mth  fpiritSy  6c c,        pt 


Tuefday,  A^rilis  17.  Cracovis, 

]\ft?er  divers  Ejaculations  appropriate  to  theaftion,  and  the  Curtain  of  white  water  yet 
remaining,  E.  K.  thought  divers  times  that  he  faw  through  the  white  Veil,  and  ftone 
and  all,  nothing  appearing  therein.  £,  K.  immediately  fell  into  a  new  doubting  of  the  ve- 
liry  of  thefe  anions,  and  faid  he  liad  a  Vilion  by  a  good  Creature  the  lalt  night ,  vvho  faid 
thefe  Creatures  with  which  we  dealt,  would  no  more  appear  unto  htm.  Hereupon  he  faid 
that  both  the  lafl  dayes  skorner,and  thefe  our  inflruftors  were  all  Devils  :  and  that  he  would 
110  more  (it  to  receive  A. B.C.  And  fo  by  Letters,  any  Doftrine  of  theirs,  untefTe  they  would 
otherWife  exprefly,  and  lively  deliver  a  plain  rule  thereof :  With  many  other  arguments  to 
difprove  the  verity  of  our  Aftions,  whereupon  he  faid,  that  John  your  boy  can  well  enou<Th 
deliver  you  their  Letters,  and  fo  you  need  not  me,&c.  I  referred  all  to  God  ,  his  will,  and 
mercies :  For.  as  1  had  at  his  hands  onely,  and  by  his  order,  and  for  his  fervice  required  wih 
dom  and  true  k^iowledge,  fo  do  I  not  doubc  but  God  will,  according  to  hi>  accuftonied  good- 
ucfTe,  provide  for  me,  that  Is  belt  for  my  vocation  here  in  earth,e^c. 

E.  K.  He  rofc,  and  went  away  :  and  left  me  alone  in  my  Study  ,  ap- 
pointed for  thefe  actions. 

Dens  in  adjutorium  meum  intende^Vomine  ad  adjuvandum  me  feftina.  Gloria  Patri  (^ 
Filio  &  Spiritui  San&o^  fieut  erat  in  p-incifio  &  nunc  &  Jenifer  &  in  fecuU 
feculorunt.       Amen, 


Thurfday,  Circa  9.  . 

As  I  was  in  my  upper  Study  ,  and  had  gathered  the  holy  words  of  the  fecond  and  thir4 

call,  and  had  conferred  them  with  tlieir  Englijh  delivered  alfo  unto  us  :  £.  K.    came  up   the 

flairs,  andfo  went  into  his  Study,  and  came  out  again,and  as  he  was  gointj  down  the  flaires  I 

opened  my  Study  door,  and  faluted  him  :  He  thereupon  came  up  again  ,  and  came  into 

my   Study  :   And  there  I  ftiewed    him  vvhat  I  had  donej  and  how  I  had  fome  under- 

ftanding  of  thofe  holy  words,  their  fignifications  by  reafon  of  due  applying  the  EnglijJj 

to  the  word  Chriftus,  intending  thereby  to  have  induced  E.K.    to  like  the  better  of    the 

mannerof  our  friends, duc,and  Methodical, proceeding  with  us,  and  told  him  that  unlefTe  of 

thisftrangc  language  I  Oiould  have  thefe  words  delivered  unto  us  Letter  by  Letter,  we  might: 

crre  both  in  Orthography,  and  alfo  for  want  of  the  true  proiuniciation  of  the  wo)ds,and  di- 

ftinftions  of  the  points,  we  might  more  miile  the  effeft  expefted  :  But  as  on  Juefdaj  lafl;  ,  fo 

now  again  he  faid,  our  Teachers  were  deluders,  and  no  good,or  fufficienc  Teachers,vvho    had 

hot  intwoyears  fpace  made  us  able  to  underftand,  or  do  fomewhat :  and  that  he  could  in  two 

years  have  learned  all  the  feven  Liberal  fciences,  if  he  had  firft  karned  Logick  ,  &c.  where-i- 

fore  he  would  have  no  more  to  do  with  them  any  manner  of  way,wifhed  himfelf  in  EngUndy 

and  faid  that  if  thefe  books  were  his,  that  he  would  out  of  hand  bum  them  ,   and  that  he  had 

written  to  my  Lord  (by  Pirniis')  that  he  took  ouf  Teddhers  to  be  deceivers,  and  wicked,   and 

no  good  Creatures  of  God,  with  many  fuch  fpceches,  and  realons  ('as  he  thought)  of  force 

to  difwade  himfelf  from  any,  more  dealing  with  them  :  But  willed  me  to  ufe  John  my  Boy  as 

my  Skryer,  for  that  thefe  fpiritual  Creatures  were  not  bound  unto  h\m,&c.  1  anfwered  unto 

all  thefe  parcels  and  reafuus,  as  rime  ferved  declaring  mj  perfeU  truji  in  G5«/,thac  feeing  I  have 

many  years  delired  3  and  prayed  for  wifdorueCfu ch  as  the!e  Actions  import)  at  his  hands, 

and  by  fuch  means  as  to  his  Divine  Majefty  feemeth  beft,  that  he  would  not  either  mijlikf  my 

prayer,  or  abufe  my  Conftant  hope  in  his  goodneUe  and  mercy  :  Therefore  /  concluded  that 

1  referred  all  to  the  mercifull  will  of  God,  and  doubted  nothing  at  the  length  to  be    fatif- 

fied  of  my  requeil  ,  and  prayer  made  unto  him.       So  he  went  from  me  this  fecond  time. ... 

God  lighten  his  heart  with  knowledge  of  the  truth,  if  it  be  his  Divine  will  and  pleafure. 

Note.  Permis went  on  lafl:  Wednefday  morning,  and  had  received  our  Letters  after 
noon^onTuefday  lail :  But  on  Monday  before  the  wicked  Prince  of  darkueffe  did  what  he 
conid  to  hinder  our  proceeding. 

.  On  Thurfday,  labius  (brother  to  my  Lord  Laskje  his  wife)  brought  news  to  Cracovia,  that 
njy  Lord  L^skje  was  coming  to  Cracovia  ward.  Emeric its  came  irom  Keftaarkf  3  and  re^ 
turned  back  again.       Tabius  rode  (torn  Cracovia  tovi3.i-dK(f}narl{^. 


S&tmdiy,  Jprilis  21.    aMeridie.  ]    ■  ■    \     .. 

After  our  prayers  made,  appeared  ftiortly  Gabriel  and  Nalvage.        E.  K.  propounded  Rx- 
queftions  orderly  ,  which  had  bred  great  doubt  in  this  fantafie,  and  reqivelled  "their-  an- 
fwers.  ...  L     Ac 

Na  ik.   He 


ij  2        A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBionsmthJfmts,d^c. 


Numbers. 

Fnrmates. 
I'utlHS. 


Note  ths  pro. 
pcrty  of  this 
McihoJ,  and 
Language. 


Un;icrfl=nd- 
ing,  Pcvftva- 
fion,  Motion, 


Adam. 


Note  two  be 
true  LanguJ- 
gcs.' 

fpccch  after 
the  fall. 
Litkx  II. 
Lirgua  Ange- 
lica. 

Lingud  Ange- 
I'lti,  Mil  Ada- 
mica  infuoin- 
noceniis  S:a!n, 


A.  He'/?ould  have  ourfpiritual  friends  topromife  him  the  peiformance  of  the  Prints. 

Gab If  we  were  M'Hiers  of  our  own  doings,  we  might  well  fromife  :     But  we  are  fervanti 

and  do  the  will  of  our  majier.     But  let  me  ask^thee  one  queiiion  : 
po/f  thou  not  think,  that  all  things  are  pffible  with  God  ? 

E.  K.   I  do  fo,  and  I  know  fo. 

Gab Ihen  is  there  no  caufe  why  thou  P^ould  dilhuli.       Let  him  that  is  a  fervanty  and  is 

commanded  to  go,  go  :  and  let  not  the  earth  rife  up,  andftrive  againji  the  plowman.  H'hat  fin  is 
7t  when  the  creature  rifeth  up,  and  faith  in  his  heart.  Let  the  Lord  make  a  Covenant  with  me, 
confjdering  he  is  a  bond  man  ? 

[  E.  K.  They  leem,  both  the  voices  at  once,  to  come  to  my  eare.  ] 

None  but  be  that  becometh  difobedient,  and  refufeth  his  Majier. 

A (^  A  would  do  fo. 

Gab,  Nal,  ...,.■.  "Thefe  things,  that  is  to  fay,  this  Vo&rine,  delivered  by  uf,  is  of  God,  andof  his 
mercies  granted  unto  you,  which  cannot  be  in  vain  :  and  therefore  to  be  performed  5  for  the 
fecrct  determinations  of  Cod  are  unknown  unto  us. 

He  never  heard  of  any  man  that  would  ask,,  if  God  would  perform  his  promifes, 

E.   K.   By  Attgnji  next  ? 

What  if  it  were  a  hundred  Augiifts  ?  you  may  he  a  weary  before  Auguft  next,  as  the  Childrea 
of  Jfrael  were  of  their  Manna* 

E.  K.  Why  joyn  you  numbers  with  thefe  letters,  and  added  none 
with  thofc  of  the  former  Table. 

Brother,  what  is  the  caufe  that  all  the  World  is  made  by  numbers?  "the  Numbers  we  fpeak, 
of,  are  of  reafonand  form,  a  fid  not  of  merchants. 

A,  I  befeech  you  as  concerning  the  powder  whereof  he  thinketh  that  he  hath  made  due 
afTay  of  ir,  as  if  it  fiiould  have  been  the  Philofophers  Stone,  and  fo  affirmed  to  be,  by  tht 
niiiiifter  of  this  aftion  ?  I  befeech  you  fo  to  anfwer,  the  thing,  as  his  reafon  may  bfr 
fatisfied. 

A.  They  gave  no  anfwer  hereunto,  but  proceeded  in  the  former  matter  of  Numbers. 

Gab Every  Letter  fignifieth  the  member  of   the  ftihjlance  whereof  it   fpeaketh.      Every' 

word  f.gnifieth  the  quiddity  of  the  fubjlance.     The  Letters  are  feparated,   and  in  confufion  :   a>iil1 
f/!)frf/orf  J  are  by  numbers  gathered  together ;     which  alfo  gathered  fignifie  a  number;  for  of- 
every  greater  containeth  his  hffer,fo  are  the  fecret  and  unkii'jwn  forms  of  things  kjiit  up  in   their 
parents :   W^here  being  known  in  number,  they  are  ealily  diftinguifhed,/o  that  herein  we  teach 
places  to  be  numhred  :  letters  to  be  elected  from  the  numhred,  and  proper  words  front  the   letters^ 
fignifyingfubjtantially  the  thing  that  is fpokfn  of  in  the  center  of  his  Creator,  whereby  even  as  the- 
riinde  of  man  moved  at  an  ordered  fpeech,  and  is  eafily  perfwaded  in  things  that  are    tru«  ,  /»* 
are  the  creatures  of  Cod  ftirred  up  in  themfelves,  when  they  hear  the  words  wherewithal   they 
were  nurfed  and  brought  forth;    For  nothing  moveth,  that  is  not  perfwaded :  neither  can  any 
thing  be  perfwaded  that  is  mtkjtown.     ?lEif  Creatures  of  God  underhand  ycu  not,  jon  are  not 
ef  their  Cities  :  you  are  become  enemies,  becanfe  you  are  feparated  from  him  that  Governeth  the 
City  by  ignorance. 

E.  K.  Whether  is  this  Language  known  in  any  part  of  the  World 
or  no  ?   if  it  be,where  and  to  whom  ? 

Gab Man  in  his  Creation,  being  made  an  Innocent,  was  alfo  author ifed  andmade  p  ir- 

taker  of  the  Power  and  Spirit  of  God  :  whereby  he  not  one/y  did  kjiow  all  things  under  bts  Crea-,^ 

tion  and  f poke  of  them  properly,  namingthem  as  they  were  :  hut  alfo  was  partaker  of  our  prefeucc, 

andfociety,yea  afpeakprofthe  myjleries  of  God;  yea,  with  God  hinifelf  :  fo  that  in  innoctncj  the 

power  of  his  part ak.ers  with  God,  and  m  hit  good  Angles,  was  exalted^  and  fo   became  holy  in  the 

fight  of  God   until  that  Coionzon  (for  fo  it  the  true  name  of  that   mighty  Devil")  envying  hit 

f  elicit),  and  perceiving  that  the  fubjiance  of  hit  Ifffer  part  was  frail  and  imperfea  in  refpea  of  his 

pure  Effe,  began  to  affail  him,  and  fo  prevailed  :    that  offending  fo  became  accurfed  inthe  fight  of 

God ;  and  fo  loji  the  Garden  of  felicity,  the  judgement  of  h  js  iinderftanding  ;    but  not  utterly 

the  favour  of  God ,  and  was  driven  forth  (^  as  your  Scriptures  record)  unto  the    Earth  which  was 

covered  with  brambles :  where  being  as  dumb,  and  not  a'hlet')fpeak_,he  b.-gan  to  learn  of  necejjitj 

the  Language  which  thou,E.  K.  callejt  [  1  Hebrew  :  ]  and  yet  not  that  [z  Hebrew']  amongftyout; 

i-n  the  which  he  uttered  and  delivered  to  hit  poJierity,the  neareft  knowledge   he  had  of  God  his 

Creatures:   and  from  his  own  felf  divided  his  fpeech  into  three    parts;;  twelve,  tiiree,  and 

fevcn  ;  the  number  whereof  remaineth  f    but  the  true   forms   and  pronuntiations  w-i^t  ;    antf 

'therefore  is  not  of  that  force  that  it  was  in  his  own  dignity,  much  Uffe  to  be  compared  with  this  that 

.we  dch\'er,whicb  Adam  verily  fpake  in  innocency,and  was  never  uttered  noi  difclofed  to  man 

ImcctiW  now,  wherein  the  power  of  God  mvii  v;ork.y   and  wiidtm  in  her  truekjnd  be  delivered: 

■which  are  rot  to  be  fpoken  of  in  any  other  thing,  neither  to   be  ta\ed  of  with  mans  imagiyiations  ; 

for  as  thu  fyork.  and  Gift  is^ofGod^  which  ii  all  prver,  fo  doth  he  of  en  it  in  a  tongue  of  power,  to 

th^ 


— ■  '      .    —    ■  —  ■ ■ —  ...,      . . .-1.  ,  .  ■    ., m. 

(9yftrue  Relation ofD^.  Dee  his  ABicns  fpkh  fpiritSy  &c.  9  3 


thf  intent  that  the  proportions  'tUtty  agree  in  themfehes  :    for  it  is  written^  IVifd-jni  fitteth  upon  an 
Hill')  and  b(holdeth  the  foi<r  Winds,  andci^irdethher  felf  t',gether  as  th.'  brightnejfe  of  the  morningy 
which  is  vifitcd  with  a  ^ew,  and  dwelleth  alone  as  tbondjo  jhe  were  a  Widow, 

I'htis  you  fee  there,  the  NeceJJitji  of  this  Tongue  :  The  Excellency  of  it.  And  the  C'i^ife  why  it 
it  preferred  be'^ore  that  wbic'? you  call  Hchrtvf  :  F^r  it  is  written.  Every  leffe^  confenteth  to  his 
greater.         I  trift  ihis  isfnftcton. 

E.  K.  As  concerning  the  power,  What  is  it? 

Gab JVhat  it  is,  that  it  is,  for  the  \nowledge  of  it  may  lead  you  to  error. 

A.  This  anfvver  offended  great!/  E.  K.  and  theieiipou  he  left  ofFjUiid  would  receive  no 
niore  at  tlicir  hands.  God  make  him  patient,  and  a  favourer  of  this  A&ion  as  foon  as  it  is 
needful  that  he  ihould  be. 

A.  Laudetur,  magnificetur  &  extollatur  nomen  Jefu  Chrijii  in  omne 
xvum.     Amen. 


Note  on  Tuefday  after  Noon^  circa  horam  quartam,zs  we  two  fat  together,  E.  K.  faid  that  24,  Aprilis 
he  thought  upon  the  matter,  Et  quod  jam  vellet  duas  boras  ntihi  cmcedere  fi-rtgulis  diebiis  ad  red-  ■■.  his  after* 
pienda  ilia,  qu£  illi  tradere  vellent.     Ego  autem  ilU  &  maxima  T>eo  gratias  egi,quia  banc  effe  mu-  "o^n. 
tationem  dextra  excelfi  fadam  vercjudicavi  ;  nam  ante  p-andium  rigidiffimits  erat  incontrarin 
opntone&fententia. 


'Wtnidzy,Cracovi£,  Apr  His  i<,.     Mane,    bora  7. 

The  Vail  appeared  as  at  rirft  ainioft.    After   half  an  hoixr  Gabriel  znANalv age  z^T^carcd^ 
after  mj  manifold  prayers  and  difcourfes. 

^.  Two  keyes  we  have  received  by  the  mercy  of  the  Higheft  and  your  minifters,  the  reft 
we  attend,  according  to  the  merciful  will  of  the  Higheft. 

Gab Move  not  fromyour  places,  for  t-he place  is  holy. 

A.  Shew  a  token  O  Lord  when  thy  will  is,  whereby  to  perfwade  thy  merciful  dealings 
with  us,  and  the  prefeiice  of  thy  faithful  Minifters. 

A.   The  frame  of  the  Stone  gave  a  crickling,no  hand  touching  it,  or  othcrvvife  any  mor-      xj^ 
tal  or  worldly  thing  moving  it.  ,  I  heard  it  very  certainly,  and  to  £.  K.  it  fecmed  the  found.  °' 

of  a  bunch  of  keyes,  as  if  they  had  quickly  been  fhakenandftrongly. 

E.  K.  Gabriel  fitteth,  and  Nali/age  ftandeth. 

Gab. My  Brethren hearl{en  to  myvoice,for  I  am  the  truefervar.t  of  the  God  of  Abraham, 

\^Z2iC,  and  ]3iC6\3.i  the  dignity  whereof  is  fufflrient  both  for  the  verity  of  the  Vo&rine,  and  the 
confirmation,  and  perfwafion  of  your  mindes  :  for  as  God  is  the  Father  of  the  Faithful,  fo  hejlteweth 
himfelfunto  the  faithful :  whereby  yon  may  prwe  the  great  comfort  and  confjlattni :  that  you  may 
jujily  gather  of  the  mercies  of  God,  as  touching  your  Eleiiion. 

For  at  what  time  hath  God  appeared  unto  the  unrighteous  ?    or  where  do  you  read  that  ever  he 
■vifited  the  rej^robate  ?    for  the  reprobate  hath  no  vifitation,  but  in  the  rod  of  Jufiice  : 

But  you  may  rife  up  amongyonr  felves,  faying  lo,  we  are  f reward,  ws  want  faith.  ^nobjeaion, 

.    True  it  is,the  aas  of  faith,  but  not  the  i-oits  of  faith.        But  I  fay  unto  you,    that  the  power  0/ /Infvrcr. 
God  in  his  Election,  is  the  Bafis  of  mans  purity  and  acceptation. 

But  here  there  is  a  (faveat. 

That  man  imagining  his  Predellination  and  perfect  Ele&ion  ,  juftifieth  not  himfelf  ;  for 
vherefoever  this  is  found,or  this  Doctrine  preached  amongji you,  either  fimply  in  man,  or  publickjy  in 
Congregation,  it  is  the  fure  fign  and  token  of  their  perpetual  ignorance  and  confufion  :  For  the 
Will  and  Tower  of  God  beloiigeth  not  to  our  meafure  (  for  it  was  the  cattfe  of  rebellion  atnongjt  us  ) 
much  lejfe  amongmcn,  which  are  fighting  yet  for  the  Glory  of  their  reward.  Behold  it  is  a  fin  in 
him  that  judgeth  of  his  brothers  Confcience  ',  Much  more  is  it  a  threefold  error,  to  form  the  inia- 
j   ginations  of  fin,  by  whpfe  imaginations  they  are. 

Be  not  proud  therefore  of  the  gifts  of  God,  but  become  humble;    Neither  JHjtifie  ymrfelfinre- 
fpeU  that  this  is  the  word  of  God  delivered  unto  yoti  for  your  own  f elves  :   But  the  more  you  receive, 
,   kethe  more  thankful  j  and  the  more  you  be  in  the  jirength  of  God,  the  more  nfe  yon  the  pureneffe  of 
humility. 

Of  wkomit  is  faid.  Behold  nty  Spirit  hath  entred,  yea  iftto  my  fervants,    and  tbey  are  become 
humble  and  meek.  i>i  the  fight  of  men  :   But  if  we  be  the  fervants  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  then  are  q^^  ,     g|, 
wethefpiritsoftrutbandunderiianding,    for  our  faith   is  dignified  in  the  fig'jt  of  the  heavens,      °     "^^ '* 
and    we    are  become  mighty   in   the   power  of  the    Almighty.         Therefore  ought    we  to    be 
believed. 

'  itow  if  you  will  confeffe  your  felves  to  be  the  children  of  Ahr4^^m,tben  muft  you  alfo  accept  of  our 
Vocirine  :  For  the  meat  whereby  Abraham  Vved,  is  the  fame  food  ws  miniiier  unto  you  :  of  whom 
't  is  [aid.  He  believed  God,  and  it  w^s  eounted   unto  him  for  r'ig'iteoufneffs.     Even  fo  do  you,: 

that 


A  CtveitMt.^ 


c)/^        ji  tmeB^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  wh  fpirits^  <5cc* 

that yonalfo  Mi^y  he  rigliteous  ^  wherein  do  you  differ  front  Abraham?   JFere  you  not  barren  i" ,, 

Who  bath  viadeyou  frf*itfull  ? 

VidGod  vtak^c  a  Covenant  with  Ahviham 'f.   Even  fo  he  doth  with y''U.  Did  the  Lord  inhisMi- 

nifters  n'^pear  :mto  him  ?  fe  doth  he,  and  will  do  unto  you.   Were  the  fins  of  Sodom   (t^e  fifth  that 

ferilhed")  imported  into  Abrahams  bofome,  as  the  fecret  determination  of  the  Lord  ?  Are  they 
alfo  not  manife'i  vntt  yon  {even  by  the  fame  God')as  touching  the  time  and  corruption  of  this  worlds 
Kofi-  hi'  not  tip  in  the  morning,  and  beheld  the  confpfion  ,  and  headlong  Ruines  of  the  wickfd  ?  And 

jkall  you  not  alfo  fee  the  ruine  of  him  thM  is  thefon  of  wickfdneffe.  lest  unleffe  you  hinder  your 
felves.  F'or  the  promife  of  your  God  is  vvichout  excepcion.      Be  mindful  therefore  of  your 

fehes  •■,  and  c.nfideryour  calling:  "Thatpu  may  beftilllleffed  inhim  that  is  the  God  of  Abraham, 
jW-'o  is  your  Father. 

Inthefe  k/yes'which  we  deliver,  are  the  my fier its  and  fecret  beings  and  effects  of  all  things  mo- 
ving ,  and  moie-l  within  the  world. 

In  this  is  the  life  of  MOTION,  in  whom  all  tongues  of  the  world  are  moved,  for  there  is 
neither  fpeech  uoi  filence  that  was  or  fhall  be  to  the  end  of  the  world,  but  they  are  all   as  plain 

here,  as  in  their  own  nak^ednejfe.  Defpifeit  not,  therefore For  unto  them  that  are  hungry  ,  it  is 

hr'ad,u:-ito  tkf  'hir  ly  drink^,  and  unto  the  nak^ed  clothing:  A  Serpent  it  is  of  many  heads  invin- 
cible. B'Heve  therefore,  that  with  him  you  way  be  wife :  that  jour  humility  may  be  fuch  j  as  may 
be  nu'ibre  I  in  the  world.      1  have  faid.     Nal.  Move  not,  for  the  place  is  holy, 

E.  K.  What  mean  you  by  that  fcntence  or  phrafe. 

Nal.  It  is  of  two  parts,  the  firjl  in  refpeU  of  the  fpirit  and  prefence  of  him  that  is  holy  :  prefent 
and  teaching.  Secondly  tn  refpeci  of  your  confent,  which  is  obedience,  for  obedience  confirmeth  the 
villof  God  inman ,  and  the  will  of  God  confirmeth  mans  falvation;  whrrefore  it  is  faid,  move 
not  :  and  why  ?  hecanfetheflaceisholy.  Move  neither  in  mind,  neither  in  body,  for  obedience 
is  the  conclufioh,  and  confirmation  »fyour  feparationsfrom  the  Devil^,  Sacrifice  is  acceftedf  but  obi* 
dience  is  better,  lou  are  furely  anfwered. 

E.  K.  I  like  your  anfwcr  well. 

Nal.  Our  wifdom,Jhall  prove  Rhetoric}{.  «' 


The  Kcyes. 

L'rgut.  iy  fci- 
eKtix. 


80         Naaq 

inyour  creation 

It  it  qiit» 

79        LEANANA 

of  the  fecret  wifdom 

Ananael. 

78         I  L  P  A  L  P 

fartak^ers 

It  U  flapli. 

77         OGUP 

as  unto  the  part ak/rs 

It  is  iiigo. 

ye         RAMAUMI 

■  ^pply  your  felves  unto  us 

It  wimuamai 

75        DO 

And 

Oi. 

E.  K.  This  letter  turneth  fo  about,  that  I 

cannot  well  difc( 

74        GALGINU 

Defcend 

VnigUgf, 

E.  K.  This  letter  alfo 

turneth  round. 

73         RACAZ 

A^ove 

Zod  a.  cax, 

72         AIHOG 

we  fay 

Gohia. 

71          GMRASAC 

in  whome 

Cafarmg. 

70        MOlAA 

Amongfl  its 

A  ^i    <"»- 

69        Z  L  0  A  C I M 

mighty 

Mi  CO.  ob^ 

6%        R  A  0  N 

it  become 

NoUTi 

E.  K.   This  Letter  moveth. 

E.  K.  Now  he  maketh  a  reverend  Curfy. 

i-j         NIAOODDO         aninitmi 

E.  JC.  This  letter  alfo  moveth^ 


oi  do  0€  in, 
Od  it  atti 


icmaff  befoon* 

deA  with  one 
breath. 


' — T- ■' 

(iJtrue'B^latmofD''^Dtthis  JBions  mthfpmts,&ic.      p^ 


E.  K.  Gabriel  fiiaketh  his  ipeaie.  Nahagc. 

€6        MOCACAC  Flourijh  Co.  ca  com, 

65  ZOSUHEI  his  mercies  Jehnfoz, 

64         A  M  C I M  BekoU  Micma. 

E.  K.  NowheufctJi  his  reverent  Curfies  again. 

63        N  A  R  I  M  A  lour  [elves  Amir  an. 


Nal.  Did.  I  itot  bid.  thuu  Jheuldefl  not  move  f 

E.  K.  He  hath  thrown  down  his  rod  upon  the  Table. 

[a.  I  had  moved  to  the  dore,  bccaufe  I  heard  fonie  going  up-and  down  the  cbanabcr  with- 
out:  wehadfoigcttento  fliut  the  ftaire-foot  dorc] 

A.  O  Lord,  I  did  it  not  upon  any  wilful!  difobedience.  But  pardon  this  Fault,  and  by  the 
grace  (O  God)  I  will  avoid  the  like  fault  henceforward, 

N»\.  It  vas  a  great  fault.     A.  I  befeech  the  Almighty  to  pardouit. 

E.  K,  Now  he  is  kneeled  down,  and  all  his  Face  is  under  the  Table, 
Now  he  is  up  again,  and  taketh  his  rod  in  his  hand,and  maketh  a  CrofTe 
ivith  it  three  times :  Eaft,  Weft,  North,  and  South. 

Nal.  Sound  your  vDord,     A.  Amiran. 

E.K.  He  pronounceth  the  i  fo  remiiTely,asitis  fcarce  heard,  and  in 
the  pronouncing  of  the  whole  word  he  feemeth  not  to  move  his  lips. 

62  S  U  H  O  G  I  fay  Gohus, 

E.K.  He  made  long  leafurely  reverence. 

61         ROLOHOG  liftuf.  Goholor, 

£.  if.  He  ufeth  reverence  again. 

Nal.   jrte  Mtxt  is  a  name  mightier  then  the  power  of  the  fame'. 

60  DAM  of  the  fame  your  God  Mad, 

E.  K.  He  ufeth  long  reverent  Curfy  again. 
E.  K.  Now  he  holdeth  up  his  Rod. 

59    '      PAIOOD  In  the  name  J)o  oi  ap. 

E.  K.  He  holdeth  up  his  rod  again. 

38         N  A  O  O  V  D  O  and  truth  Od  vooen. 

57         TLAB  ofjuliice  Balt» 

56         HALANU  rheSkjrts  Vnalah, 

55  NAON  thus  you  are  beame  Noan, 

54         D  L  I P  on  the  earth  Fild. 

5}         GSOAC  continually  Caof^, 

Now  he  ufeth  courtefy. 

52  I G  R  I  P  L  A  M  the  fiers  of  life  and  increafe     Malfirgi^ 

51  RIPNAP  pspringdo-iOK  Fanpir 

50  L  E  E  A  N  A  N  my  poiver  N^na  e  eL 

46  N  U  A  y  }'ou  might  yoor\  Vam,  ■. 


^6       A  true  'Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mthjpints,  dec. 


E.  K.  He  ufeth  reverence.    Now  he  holdeth  up  his  Rod  and  /haket 
it  about  his  head. 

48    B  A  A  T  E  N  G  your  governments 

47    ED  9/     '   ' 

46      G  A  O  N 1 1  M  rhe  corners 

E.  K,  He  ufeth  courtefie. 

E.  K.  Gabriel  {haktth.  his  fpeare. 

Nal It  may  be  called  Mi  moag  or  DiupK 

E.  jfC.  Now  he  extendeth.     oiuf 


Gnctaab 
De,is  my  nam^ 
Mi  inoag 


45    DO 

fl»^ 

Od 

44    POZIZI 

^ow  fk  highefi  vejfeli 

Izizop 

Gab (Jl^ove  not. 

•43     N  E  F  A  F 

to  the  intent  that 

Fafen 

42     B  S  A  C  0  C 

of  time 

Cocasb 

41     L  I  M  0  H 

the  true  ages 

Honui 

40    ALC 

455 

Cla 

39     SR-OV 

oat- 

Vors 

E.  K.  He  ufeth  moft 

reverent  Curlie. 

38      ILAIMPAG 

fucceffively 

Capmi'aU 

37    ASNOL. 

pwer 

Ltffifa 

3d     GRAZMOV 

unto  every  one  of  you 

«g5Kmbargir 

35    AGULD 

giving 

Dluga 

34    BAATEN 

of  government 

• 
hietaab 

E.  if.  Many  founds  are  heard  in  tht  ftone. 

He  kneelerhdowa. 

53    SONLIHT 

in  feats  siz. 

thilnoi 

32    ALAAH 

placedyou 

AAU 

31    DO 

and 

OV 

30    GRAZLAB 

Stewardt 

&rg7&'mharg^  ^ 
BALZA&G 

29    LOE 

I  made  you 

• 

EOL 

28    ILI 

in  the  fir li 

ILJ 

27    LUZROT 

Jhall  rife 

70RZVL 

2(?    DO 

and 

25    ADGRB 

24    TSD 

fleep        • 
i»hiei 

es  iurgijt 
DST 

Atrue^ekt'ton  ofT)\  T)l^MrMk^  Scc. 


23     NEIZO  m,:epmt 

^^     ^  except 

E.  K.  Now  he  ufetli  reverence. 

to  are  not 


21  EGSIHCl 

20  SIHC 

19  GROT  LOT 

18  NIIVQ_ 

17  H  CO  LET 


are^ 


the  Creatures  of  the  earth 

'ivherein 
of  death  J 


nth  [fir  its,  6c  c. 

91 

OZIEN 

E  M  it  ii  a  word 

Kit 

I  Chifge 

Kii 
Chis 

K 

Org  as  in  george 
Tohorg 
^i  in 

as  och 

in  hnchpt--"^  ;y 

lelocb               "'*' 

E,  K.  Now  he  maketh  f . 

16    HELPSOMQ^  or  the  horns 


^  lMos  Pkh 


15    NIVPAT 

^  Jhar]^  fickJeSf 

<K  two  word} 
I'api  in 

To»  may  call  it  \ 

«4    SIHC 

Tapui  alfo 

are 

m  Kh  ■ 

13    LDNV 

the  rejl 

VndL 

E.K.   Now  he  maketh  a 

Croffe  again, 
down  and  kifleth. 

Now    flf>  ■f)-n/-t.n^4.'L 

it  may  le 

i^wvv  xxc  icoopetn  < 

Vd  Lor  VndL 

12    HAPIGIG 

ofliviMghreathj 

Gi  gi  pah 

II     LIHTO 

the  featt 

Othil  . 

10    SIHC 

arc 

as  Kijfe 
Chis 

9     ZRON 

fix 

Norz 

8     HODNOLSO 

1 2  Kingdoms: 

Os  Lou  dob 

ACrofTeagain. 

■ 

\0s  fignifiethtwelve'] 

Londoh 

7    BAIB 

are 

■  • 

Biah 

Biab 

^     NfElZA 

CH  fvhofe  hands 

Aziett    % 

HeftoopethandkiiTeth  th 

e  ground. 

5    HLESMOC 

<t  Circle^ 

Com  Selh 

4    RI2 

I  am; 

Zir 

3    DAIP 

your  Cod 

.    Pi  ad 

o 


He 


% 


c;  8       A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  Bs  ABions  withfpirits,  &c; 


^.   Note. 


He  killeth  the  ground.     He  fctteth  his  hands  on  the  ground. 

2     O  H  O  G  faith  Gtho 

I     A  M  C  I M  i>tboU  Mic  ma. 


Ni 

A. 


lal..^.  ;,  7his  U  nil. 
Now, '.II  the  Name  of  Jerus,  as  it  pleafed  you  before  ,  fo  would  we  gladly  have  the 

fencehereot  in  Ew^/'i^-  ,    a      i       -n       ,         i  ,         n 

Nal Let  him    that  htth  wi[ed«r»   mdtrjtand  :  Fer   here  tegi^iHe  the  mjfieries  of  your 


Nal 
world 


I 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 
8 

9 

10 

ti 

12 

•3 

'4 
'5 
6 

7 
8 

9 

0 

I 

2 

3 

4 
5 

7 
8 

9 
o 
I 

2 

3 

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 

.0 

I 


Behold  y 
faith 
your  God, 
I  ant 
a  Circle, 
on  ffhofe  hands 
ftand 
1 2  Kingdoms  ; 

fix 
are 

the  feats 

of  living  breathy 

the  r'eji 

are 

as  Jharp  Sickjes, 

or  the  h,rns 

of  death  j 

rvherein 

The  Creatures  of  the  eartk 

are 

to  arenoty 

except 

mine  ownhand^ 

JVhich 

fe-ep 

and  ,  • 

fhallrife. 

In  the  firfi 

I  made  jou 

Stewards 

and 

placedyou 

in  feat's  1 2  for]  in  1 2  feat? 

of  government : 

Giving 

unto  every  one  of  you 

fo'srer,  • 

fucceffi-jelyy 

over 

456. 

the  true  ages 


42  oftime'i 

43  to  the  intent  that, 

44  from  the  higkeji  veffels 

45  and 

46  the  Corners 

47  ofyottr  governments, 

Gi\,....  mighty  u  the  GodofHofisy   amongfi 
hit  feofle. 

48  you  might  vtrk^ 
^p     my  power. 


50 
5^ 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

63 

H 
65 

66 

67 
6% 
69 

70 

71 
72 

73 
.74 

75 
76 

77 

78 

79 
80 


pouring  devn 
The  fires  of  lifc,and  encreafe 
coutinuallf 
on  the  earth, 
Thut 

you  are  become 
The  skirts 
of  Jujiiee 
and  truth. 
In  the  name 
of  the  fame  J  your  Qedy 
lift  upy 

Ifay, 
yourfelvesl 
Behold  , 
his  mercit) 

fiourijh, 

and  name 

u  become 

mighty 

amongji  us', 

in  whom 

yoefay. 

Move, 

Vefcend 

and 

apply  your  f elves  imto  ut, 

as  unto 

the  partakers 

of  his  fecret  wifdom 


E.E. 

K.K. 


in  jour  Creation 

Now  all  all  his  fingers  difappear. 
Now  Gabriel  ftandeth  up. 

Gab He  ark-,  0  ye  fens  of  men;  is  the  firfi  of 

nature,  and  the  beginning  of  your  being  in  body  i 
Whereby  the  things  of  the  vorld  have  life  &  live. 
Let  him  that  hath  fvifdom  underfiand.  Crow  togc 
ther,for  this  hath  its  fuiit  in  due  time.  Albert 
Lashje  hath  not  done  the  Commandment  of  God ;  he 
.  yfeo«/i  i(7Z'e  been  here  by  this  time 

A,  Gloria,  Lam,  Honor,  &  Imperium  fit  Dec  Noftro  in  inlinita  fccuiorum  fccula. 
Amen. 

Remember 


There  arc  three  calls    in  the  fccond  part 
oiCracczia,  and  one  in  the  firft. 

Thefc  four  calls  are  the  fccond,  the  ^^. 


4'''.  5'''-  for  the  firlt  Tabic  can   have 
call,  it  is  of  the  Godhead. 


no 


ajtrue  %elation  of  D'"^  Dee  his  JBions'mthJpirits,  6c c.       p p 


&.  Remember  thzt  on  f^edfclay  nighCy  AbrU  the  i").  my  Lord  A!l>ert  L<mJ^»>  came  at  nigh c 
toCracovia,3nd  lay  in  a  little  wood  Jen  building,  among  guards,by  St.Steniflaus  Church  :  and 
on  the  Friday  morning  following  intended  to  enter  his  journey  toward  Kef)nark.y  and  the 
recovering  of  Kefmark'  Jefiis  profper  his  juft  Caufc. 


Wcnfday  morning, 
Jefus 

Aprilif   1584.      Cracoviae. 

Nal., 

A  new  Jcfion  - 

—  Back^ardy  at  before. 

'  - 

52 

DAIOI 

of  him  that -liveth  for -ever. 

loiad. 

5» 

RIZ 

I  am 

Zir. 

50 

PAL 

for. 

Lap. 

49 

PLERV 

aftrongfeething; 

Vrelp. 

48 

MZA  ZO 

, 

make  ^e 

Ozazm. 

47 

DO 

and 

Od. 

46 

OZLAClM 

in  powery 

Micalzo. 

45 

NARMAZ 

jhew  jo-ur  felves 

Zamran.         '■ 

44 

D  0  QS>  N  C 

unto  hiafervants. 

[  as  C  No  quod. 

Gab. 
Nal. 

,'.'..,  The  place  it  become  more 

holy,  and  he  it  become  more  meek,. 

43 

AC 

therefore 

Ca. 

42 

RA  C  AZ 

Move 

Zacar. 

[NaL  ...;,     Make  a  flop  there.  2 
41  LEHOG  faith  the firfty  Gohel. 

E.  JJL.    Now  the   Crofle  is  come   in  again  thinner  tha«  it  was 
before. 


40 

UZROT 

Jrifey 

Torzu 

39 

N  ODIAI 

of  the  all-powerful. 

la  I  don^ 

38 

N  I  N  A  M 

in  t^e  minde 

Manin, 

37 

QP 

but 

Oqua. 

36 

EGAT 

Of  is  not 

Tage. 

35 

SROG 

Such 

Cors, 

34 

FORT     . 

a  buildingy 

Trof. 

33 

NAON 

you  are  become 

No  an. 

32 

PAL 

for 

Lap. 

51 

NOGNOZO 

then  the  manj  fold 
0  2. 

windesi,    Ozongoni 

3&   A  IB* 


3^ 

lOO          A 

trueRelation  ofD',  Dee  ^j*x  y^Swwj  mtbfpiriUy  &:c. 

50 

AIB 

jour  voices 

Bia. 

29 

SIHC 

are 

Chfs    [  the  I  long. 

28 

PL ACIM 

mightier 

Mi  calp. 

27 

DO  . 

and                      , 

Od 

2(5 

IRRO 

than  the  harreH  fitne 

.    Orri. 

25 

DSUL 

your  feet  • 

Lusd. 

24. 

SIHC 

are 

Chis  £  as  tl(. 

23 

lUlG 

jiroHger 

asGiui.       ^ 

22 

H  0  T  L  A  B 

of  righteoufneffe 

Baltoh. 

21 

EGOO 

for  the  Chamber 

Doge. 

20 

SBRV  T 

in  their  beauty 

Turbs. 

-19 

Q_LS.ROL 

the  flowres 

Lorj  1  qua. 

18 

ATCL 

IrOf 

Quu  Ta, 

.    ^7 

ADELCARAP 

fotanveddiftg 

Paradedat 

16 

OHLAT 

cm 

* 

Talhy. 

J5 

AT 

Of 

Ta. 

14 

GMARBA 

I  have  prepared 

Abramg. 

13 

AMRASAC 

vfhom 

CafarmaJ 

12 

HPDAIP 

within  the  depth  of  my  Jaws       Piadph, 

II 

ZA2AZI 

have  framed 

Izazaz. 

10 

GRUPLAI 

the  burning  flamed. 

I  al  purg. 

? 

MAB  OS 

Hvhom 

S  0  bam. 

8 

L 

of  the  fir ji       t 

A  word. 

7 

VI IV 

Oyou  thefecond 

Viiv, 

6 

DLAS 

your  veices  of  wonder 

Said. 

5 

PIAAF 

mderfland 

Fa  alp.   * 

4 

MO 

Cm. 

3 

GNOZ 

.     of  the  ypindes 

Zong. 

2 

HAAPV 

the  "win^s 

Vpaah, 

c 

TODA 

Can 

Adgt. 

fk* 


J  true  "[(elation  of  D^  Dee  his  ABions  mth  fpirits^,       i^ 

The  firji  word,       ~ j       the  firji  kthe  Ujl. 

I        Can 

E.  K.  Now  he  holdeth  up  many  hands  and  fingers  as  before,  and 
on  the  very  end  of  the  fingers  diftinaiy   thefe  parcels  appeared  in 

2. The  fecond  word — . —  Theving. 

Vpaahy  is  the  wings^  and  Adgt^  is  Can. 

3  ■""        ■  efthe  windesy 

4  *"■                 ^~  ttnderflandyoitr  voices  of  ivindest 
5 — Ojiou 

6  — "  • the  fectnd 

7 ofthefirft, 

8  " ~ "' rvhom 

9 ' '-    ■       ~^  The  burningfiawes 

JO " "> — —  have  framed 

1 1  ' ■ — •—  ypithin  the  deph  ofttij  Jaws^ 

1 2  '.  ■ '  whom 

1 3 ^-       '  ■ '— — — — —  I  have  f  related 

i4  ■ --'- as 

j^  •  — '    '    ■     ■  Cup 

J  6  •— •■ .— —  for  a  wedding) 

^j  ■' '         Or  oi 

jg  ' ■'-        — — ■ •  theflowres 

J g  "    ■*    '« '  in  their  beauty 

20  ' """ ■■ for  the  Chamber 

21 " T-         ofrighteoufneffe  j     ' 

22  "" '- ' ' ftronger 

25  -'■ —  are 

24 " >»«'■  f'^^ 

>  25  — '"■'-■  then  the  barren  flone^ 

26 '  ■  • and 

27 ■ — '    '-  ■       ■  ■  '■  ■" — —  mightier 

28  "      "'■  ' ~— —  ire 

2f  '■        ■• T—'jiour  voices 

20  —   *■'  then  the  manifold  vindes; 


31 


■For 


22 ' '- • you  are  become 

33 •- ' ■ a  buildings 


34 


Such 


55  '^ ■  '■ ■ —  ai  it  not) 

55 -*- i But  '" 

27  " in  the  minde 

58 .—I — .— — of  the  all-powerful, 

3P ^ — • Arife, 

40  -* faith  the  fir fi  ; 

^l      ,    -*. --~— , ._  Move 

42  • ■■  _  ,1 -  therefore 

E.  K.  All  the  Stone  is  become  very  dark. 

The  wicked  faid Thou  fljalt  go  no  further ..,.,. 

A.I  prayed  Keffenfn  Pfalm  9 .  and  the  Lords  Prayer,  and  the  Stone  became  clear,  and  th4  ■ 
fingers  appeared  again,  through  the  mercy  of  the  Higheft 

43 •■  — —  unto  hii  fervants; 

44  ■— •■      ■    Jhevyour  [elves 

45  ■■ in  power 3 

4^ • — — and  This  his  anj 

47' '— ■ ma\eme  Wwcorreftedj 

■  48- — — ajirong.  [^SeethtHgt^  were  of  the 

..f  wicked   h. 

50 lam  g,jti„„5^   S. 

5 1  ■»  ■     '. • of  him 

5a         t  ^>t_tmxi___^ _^  _,' that  liveth  far  everi 

E  K".  Now 


7^1       J  true^elationofD'.  Dee  his  jBions  mthfpirits,  dec. 


"^  ^. 


E.K.  Now  appear  no  more  fingers. 

Nal.  Compare  them  now  together. 

E.  K.   Now  he  is  fet  down  in  his  chaire. 

't,.  IhaveeotnparedtheEnglifliJoyntsfcothcmyfticalvTords.andl  findi2.  of  each  :  fo 

that  they  agree.  /.„    ■  j  j  i    /i 

'  Nal    ^^'Ui  :jou  have  ihh  dayes  labour.  Now  Ihe  ffhitefilK  «  extended  over  the  Hone. 
A.   Soli  Deo  noftro,  Deo  oninipotenti,&Majeftatis  tremedx,  &  fuper  omnia  amandae,  fit 
omnis  laus,gi  atiarum  afticSc  Jubilatio.    Amen. 


Friday,  Cracovi^t  Apiilis  :  Mane^  hora  fere    9. 

Oratione  Dominica  &  aliis 
Trecihus  ad  Veion  finitity  pro  luce  &  veritate,  in  banc  formant,  Omnipotem,  fempiterney  veri 
&  rive  Vem  Jiolhrf   witte  Hobh  fpiritum  fandum  &  veritatem  tuam  ,  ut  fapienter^  fideliter  &, 
conllatiter  tibiferviamuSi  omnibus  dichus  vit£  nol}r£.    Amen. 
The  white  Curtain  ,  or  veyle  ,  appeared  very  long. 

h.  It  fell  fo  out  by  the  wonderful  providence  of  Godjthat  E.  K.  and  I  quietly  confidered 
thtfe  aftidns,gen  erally,  &  the  contrary  fpirituall  informations  given  to  him,apart  by  himfelfj 
(&  fonietimes5whilewe  were  receiving  oiir  inftruftionSjbyourSchoolmaftcrs^of  which  contrary 
power,  feme  would  rayle  on  God,  and  blafpheme  his  Majefty  horribly,  as  may  appear  by  the 
record  of  feme  late  Aftiohs;  But  this  was  our  conclufion,  that  we  both  dcfired  the  verity,  and 
that  fo,  as  beft  might  pleafe  God,in  the  mantier  of  coming  by  it. 
Note  arbltrc-       ^-  i3e  Judge,OLord,betwecnus,f ending  US  the  verity  of  the  judgment,for  the  glory  of  thy 
ment'ofGod     name,  for as  much  as  they  which  impugne  thefe  proceedings,  do  fto  E.K.)  as  it  feems 
jtqaired.         jKrfeftcr  ,  and  more  wile  and  fruitful  then  our  Schoolmaftcrs  ,  which  I  took  to'be  the  true^ 
and  blefTed  Angels,  &c.  \.       ^    '   ^ 

E.  K.   Now  is  the  note  pluck't  afidc.  a.  About  an  eleven  of  the 

A.  BlefTed  be  the  higheft,  who  is  Almighty.  Clock. 

viesmirr's       Gab.  Danida  ,   a  mightjfrophet  (_tiot  the  leafiupoH  the  earth')  opened  his  mouthyMnd  faid  3 /^ffm 
Sib!  holdytherejhall  a  JFhale  come  front  the  Eajt,  the  founcnth  day  o(  thiitAonihy  SAB. 

E.  K.   They  Teem  to  fpcak  both  together. 

Gab..  Nal.  And  he  entred  into  the  field^  and  he  met  with  a  Merchant,  and  he  faid  unto  him^ 
Ihou  art  not  for  me  :  for  thy  intent  dwelleth  in  the  world.  He  went  further  ^  and  Jo,  there  was  a 
field  of  all  hjnd  of  feopUfdiverflj  recreating  themfelvfs  in  their  ownpleafures:and  he  yet  faid^Lo, 
thefe  are  rot  for  we:  and  he  went  on;  and,  lo^bejaw^  AND  It  IV  A  S  A  NA  K  EV  MAN. 

Gab.  Nal.  Mtrky  I  to  E.K.'] 

F..  K.  So  I  do. 

Gab.  Na\.'  In  his  hands  were  divers  things;mo£'ey  leaves,  flowers^  and  herbs  ^  and  he  wondred^ 
fayingiWhy  art  thou  nailed?  and  he  faid,  Lo,I  am  old  ,  and  am  without  Garments,  and  thefe  are 
jhe  things  wherewithall  1  will  be  clothed.  And  the  Vro^het  talked  with  him  ,  and  told  him  of 
fhe  Whale. 

E'  K.  They  fpcak  both   together ,   that  I   cannot  difcern    their  - 
voyce. 

Andhe  cowmandedhimto)ijieeI,andhe  lifted  up  hit  hands  to  heaven    and  frayed   within  him-- 
Jelfi  and  he  faid  aljo  unto  htm,  I  am  a  Trcphet,  rife  jip,Iwillbleffe  thee  in  the  name  »f  my  prophefte:  * 
andy  lo,he  took,  him  by  the  hand,  and  went  forward  :  and  the  way  was  rough, jiony,  and.  verj  found: 
and,  as  they  went,they  found  men,  huge  and  big,  monlhous  :   and  the  Prophet  faid ,   Thefe  fleafe  me^- 
i( Child  fiot:  nnd,as  they  talked  on'theway,they  overtook_alittle  child,And  thefhrofhet  ash^t  himhis  namCf 

aud  he  anfwered  ,  He  vtas  a  man  .•  and  he  faid ,  Thou  pleafe ji  me,  for  thou  7nayeji  be  a  man. 
A  HUl.  Ihere  was  a  Hill, and  they  ajcended,and,  after  a  while^he  child  became  weary  ,  and  fate  downyi 

faying  with  himfelf ,  This  bill  is  troublefotne,  I  ant  not  able  to  keep  company  with  them  •,  and  the 
Prophet,  milling  him,  went  back,  and  found  him  fitting.  And  he  began  to  weep,  faying.  Whither 
will  you  lead  me  s'  But  the  Frophet  comforted  him  ,'  and  faid:  Now  thou  feefl  ,  thon  art  not  a.  man.  a 
And  thus  he  did,  afcending  fundry  times;  and,  lo,it  was  the  top  tf  the  hill,  and  the  Sun  was  hot  and 
clear  in  the  mtdji  of  the  day.  The  Prophet  faid  unto  the  child,  look,  to  the  Centre  of  the  Sun,  and  fo 
he  didyjledfaftly.  4| 

Pfn  'nk  81^1-      '^'''^  ^^'  Prophet  [aid  unto  him,Now  I  have  experience  of  thee,  and  Ikjtow  thou  wilf  be  a  man;  • " 
'      *  And  he  faid  untt  him,  that  was  naked.  Here  are   Pen,  Ink.,  "^d  Paper.  — ;  .-•-  = —  i-;. 

.    And  lo  thou  haji  one  that  can  fee  far  off  ,   and  be  Jliewed  him   the  Seas :  faying,  hok.unto  the 
Orient,  Eaji :  and  he  told  him  of  the  H^hiile,  and  »f  his  coming,  and  of  many  myfieries. 

B^tthei^man  anfwered  him,fayingylMmnitked, the  ayre  it  fliarf ,  and  J  have  no  food :    How 

can 


^jitrue  Relation  ofD^.  Dee  his  JHicns  mth  fpirits,  (Sec         103 


Thus,  whiljl  th^werf  talkjug,  they  tbztvfiiited  upon  him  were  at  his  feet  armed,  faying, 
come  with  us,  f^l^we  are  ftrong  enough  to  deliver  thee. 


can  I  therefore  ST  A  X  fc  tuaKj  daj/es  ?  and  be  faid  unte  him  ^  Sic  down,  and  norejUnciil  this 

Child  become  a  man.  Note  untill. 

Feed  by  comfort.  For  the  Whale  fhall  be  tliine  ,   in  wliofebclly  is  a  Cheft   fwal lowed  of  ^ 
great  Vfelue,.  and  they  were  contcnaedi.   Behold,che  people  of  the  coimrrey  were  rich,  and  ^,'JJ^[  vj*/-^  • 
had  conquered  many  Nations,  fo  that  he  was  a  Monarch   in  the  world;  this  Monarch  was /mWk/. 
skilruH  in  all  Sciences,  and  knew  all  things  to  come,  and  he  called  hisCounfcll  together,  and 
faid  unto  them.  • 

Lo^tbus  it  ir,  thr  caufe  why  I  have  r^iitde  thoft  mi^htj  hajiks  ,  a}id  have  drawn  wy  people  frojn 
the  lon-er  places  and  the  Seji,  is  for  that,  I  fear  a  JFh  tie  :  robichy  if  he  land  in  wy  Kingdomes,  Will 
"if  jwy  deiirnBiont  andrhej  told  himnhat  the  Prophet  had  [aid,  and  he  began  forage,  and  was  puf' 
fed  t:p  with  anger,  andhe  opened  his  hokj  THE  SECOND  TIME;  and  his  eyes  Were 
opened  ,  and  he  vnderftood  that  the  Prophet  had  afceaded  unto  the  top  of  the  mountain  ,  and 
had  taken  with  him  a  naked  man,  and  a  child ;  and  he  faid  talis  Miniihrs,  Afcendy  and  bring 
me  the  child,  ftr  I  w'll  examine  b/m,and  kjtow  the  Prophets  meaning,  ar.d  he  apparelled  him  richly, 
and  ga  ve  him  much,  but  he  prevailed  not.  And  he  faid  within  hintfelf,  Afcend  again  theyfljall^  and 
bring  down  that  man. 

And  thefervants  afccnded,attd  they  found  a  Marble  (ione,  and  they  vere  angry  among  them-  ^  ^   ,, 
felvesifaying,Is  this  a  man  ?  And  lo  they  came  unto  the  King,  and  faid,  Th(fu  fendefl  us  forth,  but  flong^ 
we  found  a  mighty  fione  not  able  to  be  moved.     Where  is  it  therefore  that  thou  wilt   have  us  feel^ 
that  man^But  he  faid  within  himfelf,!  will  overcome  the  child,  and  he  took^  him  by  the  hand  ,    and 
led  him  into  hit  Orchard,  where  he  opened  unto  him  the  fecrets  of  his  hookj,  fo  that  he  became  skjl- 
ful.     But,lo,the  Prophet  arofe,  and,as  he  walked  towards   the  Hill,  to    comfort  thim  whom  be  ac- 
counted his  friends,  he  efpiedthe  child  ap|»aralled  ftrangely  ,   and  in  company  with  ftrangers  :  Strangers, 
and  he  opened  his  month,  and  began  to  prophefie,faying. 

The  King  hath  rifen  up  againli  himfelf,  for  /je  hath  GEO  SEN  THE  CHOSEN ,  and  hath 
opened  the'fecrets  of  his  own  Kingdom  to  his  deftruUiim,  and  he  jiretshed  ftrth  his  hand  ,  and  faid 
mto  the  child.  Come  with  me  :  and  he  was  unwilling,  for  bis  pleafures  were  great.  And  he  lifted 
I4p  his  toyce  and  faid  :  andhe  SJFAKE  ,  And,lo,he  carpe  with  him  even  mto  the  mountain:  and 
the  Prophet  faid  unto  him  ,  JVhen  thou  wajl  a  child  ,  I  led  the.e  ,  but  now  thou  art  become  a  mail, 
ftretch forth  thy  leggs,nnd  labour,  and  he  was  i^nw tiling, 
hgj  we 
amv/c 

Eat  the  Prophet  faid  unto  them  ,  GOE  backhand  tell  your  King,  that  1  found  him  on  the  way^ 
and  a  ftr anger,  and  I  had  pity  on  bim,  and  I  took^bim  for  my  ovfn.  Therefore  firive  not,  for  jujiice 
wuji prevail.  And  they  began  to  {tagger  as  drunkards,  for  they  knew  it  was  true.  And  the  Prophet 
faid.  Now  come  with  me->  I  willy et  lead  thee: and  thej  afcended.  The  Prophet  held  up  hit  hands,  and 
SAID,  I  SEE,  andbehold,  he  that  was  naked  arofe:  and  faid  ,  I  SEE    ALSO. 

And  the  Seas  arofe,  and  a  great  tempefi,  and  broke  down  the  banks  :  and  entred  on  the  earth,  jyf^ris  inunJa- 
doing  much  harm  to  the  people  of  that  Kingdom :  And,  lot  there  arefe  a  wind  the  S  E  €  0  N  D  :  ^^  cum  tempt- 
and  there  were  four  bealh,fuch  as  are  in  the  world,   and  were  never   kj^own.    And  they  camefitte. 
fwimming,  andfo  landed  on  the  Hill.    And  the  Prophet  faidyArife,  draw  out  your  fwords  and  kjll  V^^ntut. 
theWy  and  fa  they  did.  > 

Bebnld^the  blood  of  them  vanifl^jed  into  aire,  and  the  flejh  became  earth:  The  entrals  of  themVtnwsz. 
wajled  away  with  the  waters :  and  their  bones  burned  with  a  mighty  fire.     The  fecond  wind  arofe, 
and  there  were  five  Crowns:  in  the  niidfi  of  them  fate  the  Father  of  life,  with  a  golden  head :  whofe 
Feet  bathed  themfelves  in  due  and  fweet  Manna  :  and  the  Prophet  faid.  Put  forth  your  hands  :  and  Patervin: 
they  didfo  :  But  lo  they  were  afraid,  for  he  that  (hod  in  the  midji  of  the  Crowns,was  full  of  beauty. 

And  the  Prophet  faid.  Fear  not ,   come  with  vie  ;  and  he  opened  unto  them  tie  (ecrets  of  the  Myfleria^Ci'^ 
Crown,  for  in  every  one  of  them  was  a  golden  fentence.  And   the  fecrets  of  the  Hill  began  to ''<"""•«'"• 
fiiake,and  ther£  was  a  great  Earthfjuake. 

The  third  wind  arofe  :  and  the  twelve  Cedar  trees  that  were  never  corrupted,  came  and  planted  Veutus  j." 
themfelves  in  twelve  places  of  the  Hill,  and  they  brought  forth  ftr  ange  fruits,  not  as  Cedar  trees  do. 

The  Prophet  faid,Gathtr  ,  for  J  kjiow  you  hunger,  that  yiu  may  berefrefhed.   JVhile  they   thus  Ventus ^'. 
tallied,  thefourthwind  arofe,  aHdybehold,all  the  mountain  was  afiaming  fire,  and  there  were  f^ve  ^.Tentmotm' 
Earthquakes,  fuch  as  were  not  fince  the  beginning  of  the  world. 

The  Prophet  took^them  up,  for  they  were  become  as  dead.    And  fuddenty  The   Firmament  and 
the  waters  were  joyned  together,  and  the  Whale  CAME,  like  mto  a  legion  offtormes  :  or  as  came. 
the  hottomlefs  Cave  of  the  North  when  it  is  opened  :  and  jhe  was  full  of  eyes  of  every  fide. 

.The  Prophet  faid,Stand  ftill,  but  they  trembled.  The  waters  fank^,  and  fell  fuddenly  away  ,  fo 
that  the  JFhile  lay  upon  the  Hillyroaringlike  a  Cavi  of  Lions ,  and  the  Prophet  took,  tlj^f"  h  the 
hands,  and  led  them  to  the  Wh-^les  mouth,faying,Go  in,  hit  they  trembled  vehemently ;  He  faid  unto  ^j^^  ^j^^  , 
them  the  fecond  time.  Go  in  :  and  they  durll  not.  And  he  fware  unto  them,  and  ihey  entred  inland  m,mh.  *  " 
he  lifted  up  his  vojce,  and  cried  mightily.  Come  away  ,  and,  lo.they  Jiood  before  him  richer  then  an 
t,mperours  Ihrone,  for  unto  him  that  was  naked,  were  ebthes  given  :  unto  him  that  was  a  child  and 
a  man,  were  1 2  gates  opened.  And  the  Fropbit  erred  mightily, and  faid  ,  This  Whale  cannot  diei 
and  lifted  up  his  voyce  again  and  faid:  Within  this  fVhale  are  many  Chambers,  and  fecret  dwelling 
places ,  which  1  Will  divide  betwixt  yoii  on  ike  right  fide  {mto  the  which  was  a  child  ,  and 

ttovt 


lOi. 


4ir«>  B^fjaiion  of  I>.  Dee  his  JBions  whffirits,  <5cc. 


y^  J      ~  .  now-K  ■mafr)'tbere  are  twelve' ofenedfbut  unto  thee  that  hali  provided  jirange  Garments  for  thy 

r  iS  ^  p/;',   and  not  fitch  as  men  vfe  to  wear,  I  vhH  g^ve  thee  heai  ,  hart ,  and  left  fide  ,  whofe  flace: 

A  ^  ai-e  46.     7ou  fhall  enter  ,  and  be  pjf^ffed  this  day  together  :  And  behold  ,  the  fan  fh all  return 

^'^  '•  ^  again  2i  tim.'Sy  andin  anejear,  hut  not  all  at  one  time,     ICou  (halt  depart  hence  into  a.  ■  dialling 

...  ^  ^  that  fhall  be  all  one  :  where  there  is  no  end,  the  place  of  comfort  and  infpeakjthle  glorie, 

AMuaclt.  ,  I  ,-  •  1 

I  have  laid. 

A.    -A  si  you  have  delivered  us  a  parakle,  enigma^  5r  p  rophefie,  fo  I  befeech  you,  for  the  fee- 
ting  fprtli  of  God  his  honour  and  gloryjto  expound  what  isnieaiic  by  the, 

Gab. .. ..  Nal,  ....  The  Prophet  is  in  his  name.  Whale,thc  naked  man, 

the  GluldejdT'c. 
The  nakud^^ian  is  Dee, 
2iifpii,/i/f../V  Kelly, 
Ihr'Prince'  is  i  he  Devi  If 
%be  Hill  is  then  orldy 
■.ilte  'waters  are  the  bofome  of  God, 
The  4  beafts  are  the  4  Elements, 
7 he  12  Trees  ate  the  12  parts  of  the  Heavens, 
TheJVb.7leistbefi>iritofGod, 
Tfje  Chambers  are  the  degrees  of  wifdome, 

,^f  he  Thunders  and  windes  "are  the  ends  of  God  his  IVill  and  Judgements i 
The  reft  are  not  to  be  fpokcn  : 

This  I  tnkj'  to  notifie  to  us  the  judgement  and  nrbitrenient  of  God  between  lis  ,  in  refpe&  of  our 
P(  titioii  to  his  Divine Majejiy  now  made,  whereby  we  maj  be  ajfur'ed  what  to  judge  of  the  Creatures 
which  do  deal  with  us  in'  this  adion,  find  of  the  impugners,  or  difwaders  of  the  credit  of  it.  This  I 
tal{e  to  be  feat  a^d  delivered  unto  us,  of  the  meer  merry  and  providence  Divine  regarding  his  own 
glory,  and  the  fine  erity  of  My  hope  and  confidence,v;hich  I  put  wholly  in  him,  and  alwayes  will, 
^^■■■^  7  Hou  are  happy,  (or  youheliev-',  E^K*  what  am  I.    A.  as  happy  if  you  believe  Hkj-wife, 


Nal 


is,.   Are  you  not  to  deliver  us  our  leffbns  orderly,  as  we  have  be^un  to  receive? 
v-.ia-  c  ,..,.,Vn'h>-!LiHdthat,by  the  Fropbet  delivering  Pen,  Ink^,  and  Paper.  .^ 

Nil  S         ^-  As concemmg  the  book  writing  by  the higheft,  what  fhalll  expefttheigff? 


Cib-  7  >••••.  Vn'hyih-iHd  that,  by  the  Prophet  delivering  Pen,  Inh^ ,  and  Paper.  .^^ 

G.-,!)  )  'i!:ere  isno  fo'm  Oj-  faiTf}. 

Nj!.  jT         A.  I  believiE  verily  that  it  fhall  be  wi  itten  by  the  power  of  the  higheft, 


Nsl. .....    The  power  of  the  higheji  confirmeth  me^  but  not  my  power,  the  highefi. 

A.  Be  it  as  che  will  of  God  is, 

E.  K.  The  white  Curtain  is  drawn. 

A.   Gloria  PatriaSc  Fiiio,  8c  fplritui  fanfto;  ficut  erat  in  principio,8c  nunc^Sc  femperj  Sc  in 
fecul'a  feculorum. 

E.K,     Amen. 


Saturday,  28.  Aprilis,  Mane  horn.  8.  Cracovise. 

Orattonc  pr^mijj'a  jiatim  apparebant, 

E.  K.   They  are  here. 

Gab ^OTe  not,  for  the  place  is  holy. 

A.  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  he,  who  fanftiaeth  all  things  that  are  fanftlfled. 

N.ilvage.         E.  K.  He  maketh  Croffes  with  his  Rod  toward  the  four  parts  of  the 
\vofId.;arid  then  kneeleth  down  awhile. 

Gab Happy  is  he  that  hath  his  skirts  tied  up,  and  is  prepared  for  a  Joirrney  ,  for  the  way 

(hall  he  openynto  him,  and  in  his  j oynts  ((fall  there  dwell  no  wearineffe  :  his  meat  Jhall  be  m  the  teH" 
dird^WjJS  the  ffcectneffe  of  a.  bullocks  Cud.  For  unto  them  that  have  ,fl} all  be  given,  and  from 
them  that  have  not,  pall  be  taken  away  :  For  why,  the  bur  cleaveth  to  the  willow  Item,  but  on  the 
fandi  tt  is.tcfffd  .«•.»  feather  without  drvelling.  Happy  are  they  that  cleave  unto  the  Lord,  for  they 
Jh.llb-'  brought  unto  the  jhre-houfe :  and  be  accounted,  and  accepted  as  the  Ornaments  of  his  beauty: 
B.^tpraywithme.',,,j. 

O  thou  eternal  foundation  and  ftrength  of  all  things,  mortal  and  immortaI,which 
delight  in  thy  face  and  in  the  glorie  of  thy  name, 

Coufider  tJje  fovndatio-t  of  our  fragility  ,  and  enter  into  the  weakjtejfeof  our  inward  part! :  for 
we  art  become  empty  ;  whofe  fait  is  not,,  nor  hath  any  favour  :  Fortifie,  and  mak^  m  jfrong  in  thee, 
arid  jntl.y  ftrengtb;  Have  mercy  upon  us.  Have  mercy  upon  us  ,  Have  mercy  vpm  us;  that  in  this 
world  ourfirength  maybe  in  patience,  and  after  tl::s  life,  that  we  may  afcend  unto  thee. 

Nal,.....<^- 


A  true  Kelation  ofD^.  Dee  his  ABions  mthfpirits,  &c.       la^ 


Nal Amen, 

A,  We  prayed  the  fame  prayer.  _ 

E.  K.  Now  Nalt/age  ftandech  up  irpon  his  Tabic  of  Letters. 

Nal It  it  a  fide-long  Letter. 


47     pALOMaON  the  fons  of  vteH 

*"  E.  K.  Now  he  kilTeth  the  Table. 


Nor  nio  lip. 


46    FA  A 

amon0 

Atf 

4^5     L  I  T  S  E  R 

that  you  may  praife  him 

Reft  el. 

Now  he  kifleth  the  Table,and  maketh  moft  humble  and  low  Curfies, 
having  fii  ft  laid  down  his  Rod. 
44.    GNOSILEBO 
43     NARMAZDO 

jt 

E.  K.  Now  Gabriel  fhaketh  his  Dart  terribly. 
E.  K.   Why  fhakc  you  your  dart  fo  ? 

Cab Scbolers  ought  to  give  ear  to  their  School-majiers. 


As  pleafant  deliverers 
And  pew  jour  f elves 


Obelifong 
Od  Zawran 


42    RACAZ 

LMove 

Zacar. 

41     L  A  A  CL. 

of  the  Creatour 

Qa*l 

40    PIAOOD 

in  the  name 

Do  6a  ip 

39    ALIPADO 

and  livetb 

Od  Jpi  la 

38    I  SD 

rehirh  it 

DSI 

57     D  At  A  N  E  R  I  Z 

I  am  the  Lord  your  Cod 

Zire  nai  ad 

Now  he  ufeth  his  ace 

uftpmed  Curfie. 

36    ELGAB 

-for 

Bagle 

^5    AGSOAGF 

vifii  the  earth 

Fgaos  g« 

34    OD 

and 

Od. 

55    IHASAVQJIOM 

you  fans  ofpliafure 

Nor  qiiit  fa  hi 

34    VGROT 

Arife 

Torgu 

51     ALC 

456 

cu 

30    OLAT 

mthefirji 

TaU 

2?    SIHC 

are 

Chis 

28     NIHSNOLDO 

ind  their  powers 

Od  lonftiin 

Now  he  kneeleth. 

37     NOAMIPAG 

tic  mmher  of  time 

Capi  oia  6n 

P 

26    SIHC 

no       %A  true  Relation  of  I>^  Dee  his  JBions 

mhfpirits,6tc. 

i6     SHJC                                           are 

•    This      .   '     . 

25      I L  A  M I  P  A  C                              fiicceSiveljy 

Ca  pi  ma  li 

34     TSD                                                  ffhichtlfo 

DST 

Now  he  falleth  fuddcnly  on  his  knees. 

'^ 

23     G  E  G  V  D  0                                    "n^  ipax  firong: 

as  Wed§c 
Od  Vgeg              . 

2»     SIHC                                             «>•?, 

Now  he  kneeleth. 

Kis 

Chis 

21IZDOORC                                 the  fecond  begimhigs  of  things      Cro  od  fi 

20GMRASAG  in  whom  thr  g  as  ia 

feiifgc 
Cafarnag 

19     LPRC  hutone  ;  CRPL 

18     O  P  M  R  O  C  hath  yet  mwhred  Conn  po 

17    GA  2^i>/fr  asaggiaiHg 

Ag 

16     MABOS  w*o»»  Sobam 

15     MP  AM  9639;  Mapm 

14     t  L  A  O  /  Atfz/e  i'/rfCfi  O  a  li 

13     I  M  R  A  S  A  C  j/a^/fr  »/!«)»»  Ca  faroui 

izVlDVIV  in  thefecond  angle}  Vi  v  di  » 

Now  he  lifted  up  his  hands. 

II     F  N  O  S  D  vhkb  raign  Dfonf 

£.  K.  Now  he  goeth  off  the  Tablc5and  knecleth  Down. 

rede 


10    DP 

3J 

PD 

Now  he  lifteth. 

9    PMROC 

tiumhred  ? 

Cormjp 

8    OGAVAVA 

the  thmden  «/  eKcreafe 

Ava  va  go       \ 

7    EGSIHCG 

Are  not 

GChlsgc^'*  t'l^ 

6    LOHOG 

fayhtgj 

Go  hoi 

5    AHP.ROD 

have  leek^ed  about  wf. 

'3 
Dor  pha 

■^ 

H.    DO. 

(^true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  Anions  mth  fpirits,  &c^        ill 

4    DO 

3    EGABAB 

a    IDSAL 

I     LIHTO 

E.  K.  The  Tabic  turncth  continually  to  his  Rod  end  ,  and  the  Let- 
ter fecmeth  to  ftandonhis  Rods  end  diftin6:ly.  That  is  it.  This  is 
this  Call. 


and 

Od 

in  the  foiith 

Ba  bage 

wy  fett 

Lasdi 

I  have  fet 

Othii 

■y 
4- 

5  - 

6  - 

7- 
8- 

9- 

10- 

II  - 

12";- 

»3~ 
14- 
i$~ 

16- 
17" 
18- 

19  ~ 

20  - 

21  - 

22  - 
25- 
24- 
25- 


—  /  have  fet 

—  wj  feet  -  ' 

—  /;;  i/jf  /iHri&, 

—  ani 

—  about  niej 

—  f''ji»gi 

—  are  net 

—  the  thunders  ef  inert afe 

—  Hiimhredt 

—  thirty  three 

—  which  raign 

—  in  thefecond  Angel; 
_  under  whtnt 

_  I  have  placed 

-9639- 

_  whom 

_-  None 

_  bath  yet  nunthred 

_  hut  one 

_  in  whom 

_  the  fecond  beginning  of  things 

—  trey 

_  and  wax  firong 
_  Fi&ici  alfo  : 


25- 

27- 
28- 
29 
30. 

31- 
32. 

33- 
34' 
35 
36. 

37 
38 

39- 
40. 
41. 
42 

43- 
44. 


45- 

46  _ 

47- 
48- 

49- 
50- 


'fucceftvely:i  [or  by  fucceffion'] 

•  are 

■  the  number  of  time-, 

and 
■■  their  powers 

•  are 

-  as  the  firjl 
-456. 

-  Arife 

-  you  fans  of  pleafure^ 

•  and 

-  vifit  the  earth  > 
-for 

.  I  am  the  Lord  your  Cod 

-  which  it 

~  and  Hveth. 
,  In  the  n-ime 
_  of  the  Creator 
.  L^love 

-  Andjhew  youfelves  [or  appear"] 
.  as  pleafant  deliverers  , 

.  that  you  may  praife  him 

_  amoHgji 

_  the  fons  of  men. 


£.  K.  He  hath  now  plucked  the  Curtain  to. 

A.  Note.  • 

A.  Thanks  be  to  God  J  now,  and  ever.        'Amen,  & 

A.  Remember  to  rcqueft  information  of  fuch  a  word,  as  (faith  the  Lord)  is  not  here  to  be 
underftoodj  fomc  where. 

Note,  the  fecond  Angel. 


Monday  Cracovid,  Aprilis  30.   Afane  hora  6  f. 

Oratione  Dominica  finica  ,&  precatiuncula  pro  profpero  fucceflu /^.  L.  ( jam  apud /Tf//^ 
tnark,y  queritantisSc  petentis  jus  fuum  hereditariura,  &  aliis  brevilfimis  ejaculationibus,  pro 
profpero  fucceflii  in  hac  aftionc  tandem  port  femi  horam  apparuerunt, 

E.  K.  Now  they  are  here :  and  Gabriel  is  all  full  of  glory,  he  feem- 
eth  to  light  all  places. 

A.  O  the  mercies  of  God  encreafed,  though  his  determination  be  all  one 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  as  he  was  before  :  and  in  the  time  of  this  his  glori- 
ous apparition,  Nahage  kneeled  down,  fomewhat  regarding  towards 
Gabriel, 


P  s 


Cab.  ...Civt 


n  X        J  true  Relation  cfD\  Dee  his  jBioris  mthfp'mts,  ^c. 


6 


Gab Give  vnto  him  that  hath  his  haslet  of  en :  But  from  kirn  that  is  not  ready  ydefart. 

E.  K.  There  appear  here,  j  other  like  Priefts,  all  in  white,  having; 
L  long  hair  hanging  down  behind  :  their  white  garments  traile  after 
^  them :  having  many  pleits  in  them.  Me  think  that  I  have  fccn  x)ne  of 
H  them  before,  and  upon  that  creature  appearcth  a  B  upon  his  cloathes, 
^  an  Lin  another  place,  an.R  upon  his  other  (houldcr,  another  A  upon 
A  his  other  fhoulder.  There  is  an  H  upon  his  breaft  -■>  there  is  an  1  upon 
V  his  head,  and  a  C  upon  his  fide  on  his  garment;,  and  an  A  under  his 
H  waft  behind:  The  Letters  feem  to  "go  up  and  down  enterchangeably 
D  in  places.  There  feemeth  an  V  on  him,  alfo  an  N,  a  D. 
^  Nowcometh  atallmanby,  all  in  white,    and  a  gicat  white  thing 

rowled  about  his  neck,  and  coming  down  before  like  a  lippet.      They 
^11  in  the  Stone  (  being  9  )  kneel  down  unto  him. 

The  tall  man  faid Tal{e  this  Key^  and  pojper  :  afccnd  and  fill  thy 

fejfelj  for  the  River  is  not  pure-,  and  made  clean. 

E.K.  Now  he  is  gone  (  that  faid  this )  in  form  of  a  great  Millftone 
of  fire. 
An  Hill.  E.  K.  Now  they   go  up  a  Hill ,  with    a  great  Tankard ,  as    it 

were,  of  Bone  tranfparent  i  Now  he  openeth  one  door,  he,I  meanjtJiat 
had  the  Letters  on  his  back. 

1.  There  appeareth  a  Partridge,but  it  hath  one  leg  like  a  Kite  :  This 
Partridge  feemeth  to  fit  on  a  green  place  under  the  gate,  one  leg  is 
much  longer  than  the  othcr,being  like  a  Kites  leg.  This  Partridge  feem- 
eth to  halt. 

He  biddeth  one  of  his.Company  take  it  up.  There  goeth  a  bridge 
to  the  top  of  that  Hill,  all  upon  arches,  and  under  it  goeth  a  Pviver. 

He  taketh  the  Partridge  and  pulleth  all  his  feathers,  •  and  they  fall 
into  the  River  :  Hecutteth  ofFthe  longer  leg  juft  to  the  lengih  of  the 
other.      They  about  him  cry,  O  juft  judgement. 

Now  he  turneth  him  off  over  the  Bridge,  and  he  flyeth  away,  for  the 
feathers  of  his  wings  were  not  pulled. 

2.  He  goeth  on,  and  (t)meth  to  another  gate  ^  and  there  the  third 
man  unlocketh  it,  as  the  fecond  next  him  unlocked  the  iirft  Gate  i  he 
hiinfelf  having  the  Key  firft  delivered  him,  as  above  is  noted.  There 
appeareth  a  thing  like  a  Kite,  all  w^hite,  very  great,  it  hath  a  fowl  great 
head,  he  feemeth  to  be  in  a  very  plcafant  Gaitlen,  and  fl)  eth  from  plac^ 
to  place  of  it,  and  beateth  down  the  Rofe  trees  and  other  fruit  trees. 
The  Garden  feemeth  very  delicate  and  pleafant.  They  go  all  into  the 
Garden  :  and  he  faith,  Thou  art  of  the  Wildernefle,  thy  feathers  and 
carkafe  are  not  worthy  the  fpoil  of  the  Garden.  . 

Now  the  Kite  fcratcheth  and  gafpeth  at  this  man  •■,  but  he  taketh  the 
Kite  and  cutteth  her  carkafe  in  two  equal  parts,  from  the  crown  of  hi§ 
head,  and  throweth  one  half  over  one  fide  of  the  Bridge,  and  the  other 
half-over  the  other  fide,  and  faid,  Fowles  mufi:  be  devoured  of  Fowles, 
^The  reft  fay,  0  jjtjiitia  di'vina^  clapping  their  Jiands  over  their 
heads. 


3.    Now 


'■    ■  I.     ■■'  ■  ■■       '  '  'I -  I  I  _ 

aJ  true  Relation  of  D^^  Dee  his  ABions  mthffirits,  (3cc..       1 1 3 


q.  Now  the  next  in  order  opcneth  another  Gate  (going  up  upon 
the  lame  Bridge  ilill.  )  The  reft  of  the  building  from  the  Gate  in- 
ward, feemeth  very  round  and  bright :  yet  there  appear  no  windows 
in  it.  It  is  a  frame,  made  as  though  the  7  PJanets  moved  in  it.  The 
Moon  feemeth  to-be  New  Moon. 

There  ftandeth  Armour,and  this  man  putteth  on,  all  white  Harnefi^. 
He  feemeth  to  kick  down  the  Moon,  and  her  frame  or  Orb  ;  and  feem- 
eth to  make  powder  of  all  i  For  there  is  no  mercy  here^  faith  he. 

4.  Now  another  of  them  goeth  forward  to  another  Gate,  and  open- 
eth  the  Gate,  and  goeth  in ;  there  appear  an  infinite  multitude  of  mqn. 
There  fitteth  amancloathed  like  a  Prieft,  havinga  great  Crown  on 
his  head:  here  are  many  preaching  in  this  place.  He  goeth  to  that 
Crowned  P)ieft,and  he  takcth  away  divers  patches  of  the  Vefture  which 
he  had,  and  the  patches  feemed  to  be  like  Owls,  and  Apes,  and  fuch 
like. 

He  faith  A  King  is  a  King^anda  Prieft  is  a  Prieji. 

He  taketh  from  the  reft  their  Keyes  and  Purfes,  and  giveth  them  a 
Staff'and  a  Bottle  in  their  hiinds.  He  goeth  from  them.  He  putteth 
all  that  he  took  from  them  in  a  houfe  befide  the  Gate,  and  writethon 
the  door,  Cogtiofcat  qujfque  fuum.  ?„J5°',^ 

Nowthey  proceed  to  another  Gate,  and  another  of  them  opened  that 
Gate.  The  Bridge  continueth  ftill,  afcending  upward.  Now  there 
appeareth  ( that  Gate  being  opened  )  a  marveJlous  great  Wildernefle. 
There  cometh  a  great  number  of  naked  wilde  men  to  him.  He  Jfha- 
keth  that  Gate  with  his  hands,  and  it  falleth  in  pieces,  one  falleth  on 
one  fide  into  the  River,  and  the  other  falls  on  the  other  fide  into  the 
River,  '-'''' 

Let  both  thefe  places  be  made  one.     Let  the  fpoil  of  the  firft,be  th^omfcrt  of 

the  la'i :   For  from  them  that  have  Jhalt  be  takjri,  and  unto  them  that  have  notjhall 
be  given. 

6.  E.  K.  Now  he  goeth,  and  the  laft  of  his  Company  openeth  an- 
other Gate  ;  he  is  longer  in  opening  of  that  Gate,than  any  of  the  reft.    • 

There  appeareth  a  buihy  place,  and  there  runneth  a  great  River  on 
the  very  top  of  the  Hill,and  a  great  Gate  ftandeth  beyond  the  Hill,and 
a  Very  rich  Tower  all  of  precious  Scones,  as  it  feemeth. 

Here  he  filleth  his  Tankard  in  the  River,  and  holdeth  his  hands  up, 
and  maketh  fhew  as  he  would  return. 

He  faid This  was  my  coming.,  andfboidd  be  my  return. 

E.  K.  Now  they  appear  fuddcniy  before  the  firft  Gate,  and  there 
the  Principal  man  diggeth  the  earth,  and  putteth  ftones  and  brambles, 
and  leaves  afide.  There  he  taketh  out  a  dead  carkafe,  and  bringeth  it 
to  a  fire,  and  ftroketh  it :  a  very  lean  carkafe  it  is  j  it  feemeth  to  be  a 
dead  Lion  i  for  it  hath  a  long  tail  with  a  bufli  at  the  end. 

He  faith  .  ....  Come  let  us  take  him  up^  and  comfort  him  j  for  it  is  in 
him. 

Now  the  Lion  feemeth  to  fit  up  and  lick  himfelf,  and  to  drink  of  the 
v^rater,  and  to  ihake  himfelf,  and  to  roar.      The  man  taketh  of  the  fegs 

or 


14      A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions  mthjfirits,&ic. 


or  flags  by,  and  ftrokcth  the  Lion  as  he  would  make  his  hair  finooth. 

Now  the  Lion  is  become  fair,  fat,  and  beautiful. 

He  faith Tarry  you  here^  till  I  bring  yon  word  again  •■,  for  I  nmfl. 

follow  the  Lion  into  the  Wilderiicjfe. 

E.  K.  Now  all  they  are  gone,  except  the  two  our  School-majiers-, 
Gabriel  and 'Ndlv age. 

Gabu qhij  it  the  Judgement  oi  God  t\x\s  day.        Haffy  it  he  that  hath  judgement  t» 

gmderjiand  it.  , 

A,  Thou  O  Lord  kiioweft  the  meafure  of  our  judgemjent :  Give  therefore  light,  undcr- 
ftauding,  and  the  grace  to  ufe  thy  gifts  duely* 

Gab.  ..'....» Lijieu  unto  w)  wordsj  for  they  are  a  Commandment  from  above.  Behold  (^faithhe) 
Thave  defcetided  to  view  the  Earthy  yeltere  I  will  dwell  for  feven  dayes,  and  twice  [even  dayei  : 
Ibrrtfore  let  them  be  dayes  of  reji  to  you.     But  every  feventh  day,  I  will  vifit  yDU,  as  Now  I'dot 

E.  K.  He  fpeaketh  as  if  he  fpake  out  of  a  Trunck. 

A,  I  undcritand  that  this  reft  ii,  that  every  Monday,  for  three  Mondajes  clfe  next  after 
other,  we  /hall  await  for  our  leflbns,  as  now  we  receive,  and  that  we  may  all  the  reji  follow  our 
-a^airi'ef  fiudj  cr  hovfksld  m^atters. 

Gali. It  u  fOf  for  one  day  fhall  be  as  a  week  :  But  thofe  dajes  you  mufi  ahjlaia  fr»m  all 

tbiZgs  that  live  upon  the  Earth. 

£i,  Ycu  mean  on  theic  three  Mondayes,  enfucing  next. 

Gab Toufiall  cover  this  Table  with  a  new  limien  cloth. 

£.  K.  Pointing  to  the  Table  we  lat  at. 

A.  Mcft  willingly. 

Gab.  ~....  Moreover  a  new  Candleftickf.,  with  a  Taper  burning. 

A.  Obediently  (  O  Lord  )  it  {hall  be  done. 

Gab. And  the  Candlejiichj  Jhall  befet  oh  the  midji  of  the  Table  betwixt  jou  tm, 

J^ote  ... ...  That  a  day  may  become  a  week,  and  a  week  as  many  years. 

Cab-.....- Jer  I  have  fut  on  my  upper  garment^  and  have  ^re^attdto  a\tet,and  it  is  jhortly  : 

and  not  yet. 

E.  K.  Now  he  hath  plucked  the  Curtain,  as  if  he  had  pulled  it  round 
about  the  Stone  •,  and  it  feemeth  full  of  little  fparkes  like  Stars. 

Gloria  patri  (j^  filio  (j^  fpiritnifa?iSlo  jficut  erat  inprincipzoy 
^  nw2£j  ^  femper^i!^  in  fecidafecidornm. 

Videlibro F  pro  fsquentibus. 

L 


LIBRI 


J  true  Relation  of  D".  Dec  his  JHions  mtb  fpirits,  6cc,       1 1' 


LIBRI    MYSTICI     APERTORn 

CRACOVIENSIS  SABBATICI,  Jn.  1584. 


.;  ifvi'"i 


Satttrday  Cracovi«e,  7  Mdii^  Mane,  hora  6. 

cer  prayers,  appeared  Gabriel  and  Nalvage,  with  the  Table,  and 
Gdirif/ with  his  Dart  in  his  hand.  Moreover  there  appeared  the 
like  furniture  of  Table  with  a  white  Cloth,  a  Candleftick,  and  Ta- 
per on  it,  with  a  Desk  and  Cufhions  (  which  I  had  caufed  to  be  made 
with  red  croflcs  on  them  :  )  alfo  £.  if.  hiralelf  and  I  apjjeared.^in 
the  fame  Stone.  In  effeft,  all  things  as  we  had  before  us  ,  after  half 
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  that  ftiew  of  our  furniture,  ^ad  our  fclvas, 
difappeared. 

E.K.  Gabriel  ftandeth  up,and  fpeaketh  as  followeth. 

J  mighty  Citj  was  built  on   the  top  of  a  mouHtain,    in  the  which  dwelt   many  thovfands. 

Round  about  the  Hil\  ran  a  frejh  E  iver,  which  was  the  onely  comfort  of  the  Town  :  for,  of  it  they 
drank.y  'heir  wives,  their  children,  their  vtan-jervants,  their  ntaid-fervants,  their  canteh,  horfes, 
vmles,  and  a!Lthe  beafis  of  their  fields.  The  beginning  of  which  River  was  a  Spring,  which  wot  un- 
known to  the  city,  by  reafon  of  the  .  .  yth  front  whence  it  defce»ded.  It  came  to  pajje,  that  a  Ser- 
pent groaned  for  her  time,  and  lo,  jhe  brought  forth  :  and  .  . .  were  fuch  as  her  felf:  and  Jhe  lifted 
up  her  bead  and  leaned  upon'her  twice  writhen  taile  :  and  beheld  the  Sun  jiedfajlly,  ("  for  her  envy 
•fPM  toward  that  City  )  and  /befaid  within  her  felf  :  My  children  are  yet  young,  the  timegrew,and 
they  became  big  :  and  Jhe  went  unto  the  Spring,  and  fmiled  and  faid  with  a  laughing  voice.  The 
Earth  is  faUen  into  thee,  thou  art  cbokfd  :  but  hearken  unto  my  voice,  Thoufhalt  receive  comfort  z 
JiMt  /he  would  not.  And  jhe  lifted  up  her  voice  and  roared  ;  for  Jhe  was.  full  of  craft  and  deceit. 
And  Jhe  faid  unto  the  Jhingles,  through  the  which  the  Spring  runs  Qor  rather  fyeth  )  "thou  art  full  of 
emptineffe,  and  void  places.  Let  my  children  ('therefore')  bide  themfelves  within  thee  for  a.  feafon  : 
and  they  were  contented;  And  Jhe  departed  willingly,  and  faith  within  her  felf:  NjW  I  kjtow  I 
(hall  be  Lady  of  the  City, 

And  after  a  few  years, the  young  Serpents  became  great ',  fo  that  the  one  half  of  their  bodies 
dwelt  within  the  Shingles,the  reji  troubled  the  paffige  of  the  Spring  :  So  that  the  Spring  groaned  5 
for,  the  injury  that  wm  done  againii  h^r,  wm  ere  at. 

A  great  mifery,  for  the  Hill  is  become  defolate  without  the  water,  and  the  City  and  the  beajis 
perijh  for  want  of  drinks ;  f'/r  the  people  groan,  and  are  fud  of  forrow. 

.  This  City  and  Serpents  are  60..  now,  and  judgement  muji  be  had,  betwixt  the  Shingles  and  the 
Spring .  for  between  lieth  the  life  and  death  of  the  City. 

Thus  faith  the  Lord  unto  thee  [  pointing  to  E.  K.']  Gird  up  thy  felf ,  and  fit  down,  Confidef 
loth  parts,  and  give  judgement :  for  thy  mouth  Jhall  this  day  be  the  judgement  of  the  Lord. 

E.  K.  Do  you  mean  me  ^ 

•  • 

E.  K.  As  the  Lord  hath  put  the  Authority  of  Judgement  into  my 
hands,  fo  I  befeech  him  to  give  me  wifdom  and  underftanding  to  judge 
right.  And  becaufe  the  judgement  hereof  is  committed  to  me,  I  fuf- 
ped  fome  other  myftery  to  ]i>;  hidden  in  this  my  judgement  required  : 
But  if  it  Ihall  pleafe  God  that  my  friend  here,  Mafter  Dee  ihall  give  me 
his  advifc,  I  fha!l  think  my  felf  well  fatisficd. 

C  on  fid  er  With  your  felf  Q  faith  tbf  Lord)  and  give  judgement  againdthe  Shingles,  for 

the  fault  is  plain.         Consider  two  points,the  necejit}  of  the  Spring,  that  it  muji  come  that  wayes  : 
and  fecondly, the  health  of  the  City. 

E.  K.  My  judgement  is  that  the  Shingles  and  Serpent  fliould  here* 
moved  av^'av  by  an  Earthquake  from  the  place  which  they  encumber 
and  let,  that  there  mav  be  a  fit  new  place,  and  courfe  for  that  Spring? 
to  the  relief  of  that  City  as  before  it  was. 


it^        A  true  ^laiion  ofD\  Dtchu  Jciions  mthfpirks,  ^c. 

Be  it  fo  at  thou  hafl  fatd,  for  it  is  a  iufijudgewent. 

How  hearkfttyVhat  the  Lord  faith.      The  people  and  City   of  the  Hillj  is  the  vorld,  yphich  «Ti 

from  time  tt  time  by  the  mercy  and  fpring  of  Gods  vifd,m,  relieved  , .  quemhed  :  arCorliing  to  tht 

extremity  and  nectfjtty  of  their  thirjUng  :  But  the  people   and  City  are  fuch  as  are  of  the  Tevipk 

4HdChtirchofGod-y  which  drink,  of  hit  mercy  to  their  comfort.     The  Camels  and  other  be afis  an 

the  people  of  the  f^arthy  which  delight  infm^  and  m  their  own  imagination.,  which   ajpi  are  relieveii 

vith  thoft  that  are  of  the  City  :   but  the  diverfities  of  their  bodies^  doth  caufe  the  diverfity  of  tki 

ends  of  their  comfort.     The  Hill  wherein  the  Spring  ify  fignifieth  his  Prophets,  and  (iich  as  ait 

drunken  in  tHc  Lord  :     Through  wbowy  inwardly  the  mercies  and  will  of  God  and  of  the  H'ght^ 

are  open  from  time  to  time,  according  to  the  fccrcc  will   and  determination   of  fuch  m  are  within 

theCitJofhisEleU.     But  the  frailties  and  affednns   of  their  fiefh  and  outward  man^  are  tiieh 

fond  imaginations  and  loofe  Shingleswheretnthe  Serpent,    the  old  Devil,    hathharbvitredher  chil- 

drefi  the  fpirits  of  dark^'teffe  aHd  deceit,  which  alrvayes  refill  the  Will  of  God,  and  ar^f  put  bettceem 

the  mercies  of  God  and  his  people,      Mofcs,  Daniel,  EfdraS)  all  the  reji  of  the  Prophets  :  Chrii 

bis  twelve,  Paul  the  C^teffenger  of  Cod,  they  did  all  hurt  the  Congregation  of  the  Faithful  in  their 

flejh,  xxutW  they  gave  fentence  againil  themfelves   (  <?f  thou  haft  done  )  with  amendment  of  life : 

for  who  u  worthy  to  kjiow  the  fecrets  of  our  God,but  he  that  deltghteth  in  righteoufncff'e ,    «■  d^dtexty 

full  of  faith,  and  the  fpirit  of  underjlanding  ?   Be  it  therefore  unto  thee  m  thou  haji  faid.     Let  the 

Shingles  and  Serpents  be  feparated,  that  the  Fountain  may  feed  as  before-     All  the  trajh  that  thti. 

haji  of  the  wicked,  hum  it. 

E.  K.  I  do  not  know,  they  arc  wicked.  * 

Their  doings  with  thee,  are  the  hindrance  of  the  Will  of  God,  and  therefore  diey 

are  wicked. 

"Thou  haji  given  judgement  aga/nfi  thy  felf  :    Takjr  heed  thou  offend  not  thy  own  foul. 

A.  Send  down  thy  Spirit  O  Lord,  and  illuminate  £,  it.  his  heart  with  perceiving  cf  his 
wrong  opinion,  &c. 

E.K.  l(  Mofes  a.nd  Dante  I  were  skilful  in  the  Arts  of  the  Egyptian 
Magicians,  and  were  not  thereby  hindrcd  for  being  the  fervants  of  God, 
Why  may  not  I  djeal  with  thefc,  without  hindrance  to  the  Will  of 
Cod? 

Durkjuffe yeilded  unto  light :  the  Greater  excluded  the  lejfer-     The  more  a  man  \nowrt^ 

wick^dneffe,  the  more  he  Jhall  ha te  it,  being  called  back^.  The  more  they  knew  the  Jfjadnw,  fo  -mnch 
more  they  delighted  in  the  body  :  For  the  doings  of  the  Es,Yptm\s,  feem,  and  are  nctfe.  Tie 
doings  of  the  Lord  are,  and  continue;  for  as  the  Painter  imitateth  the  gtjiures  of  man  in  Sir  fa- 
culty, fo  doth  the  Devil  the  fnbjiances  and  things  created  and  made  by  God, 

Stand  up  and  look^  into  the  whole  fForld,  into  her  youth,  and  middle  age,  for  they  are  f*^. 
Where  are  the  monuments  that  Satan  hath  builded? 

E.  K.  Hath  Satan  buildcd  any  monuments  ? 

Tes  :   Hath  he  not  budded  him  a  Fort  upon  the  whole  Earth  ?      Hath  he  not  the  vidorj  ' 

ever  the  Saints?  Dwelleth  he  not  in  the  Temple  of  the  Hig^efi  ?  Triumfheth  he  not  in  the 
Cities  of  the  whole  World  ? 

Tfj.  ..V...  But  withtut  comfort,  are  his  viHories  :  without  pleafure  bit  dwelling  places.  For  be 
kjiowethhis  time  is  at  hand.  He  that  now giveth  freedom,  fljall  become  hound;  And  unto  whom 
the  whole  World  is  M  a  Garden, fljall  there  be  no  one  foot  left.  Therefore  are  all  his  pleafnres  vJt~ 
nity:  allhisTriumphsfmoah^  and  his  Authority,  ttothing  indeed,  but  a  meer  jhadow  :  For  that 
that  ii  not, cannot  be  ;  where,  it  is  faid  of  the  Lord,  it  Jhall  not  be.  Neithercan  truth,  light, 
or  wifdom,  afcend  from  the  Earth,  but defccnd from  the  Heavens. 

Compare  the  Earth,  (  into  the  which  the  Devil  is  thrull  us  into  his  dwelling  )  with  the  Heaxiem, 
which  are  provided  for  the  holy.  Confider  the  pain  of  the  one,  and^the  pleafurc  of  the  other  :  'Jib 
feat  of  Gods  Juliice,  and  Fountain  of  his  Mercy :  The  Cave  of  Darkjieffe,  and  the  Diadem  ef 
Lig^t.  And  then  cry,  wo,  wo,  wo,  unto  fuch  a{  err e,  and  whofe  lives  are  but  padows :  For  their 
felicity  is  fuch,  as  jrom  whence  it  came;  and  their  reward  it  all  one,  with  the  fpirit  and  prince  tf 
Darkjteffe. 

Compare  fond  knowledge,  with  true  wifdom.   Thy  fpirits  of  lying  with  us,  that  are  the  voice 

of  truth  ;    The  vanity  tk\'t  they  lead  thee  into,  and  the  reward  of  our   miffage  :     And  fay  within 

Ks    life         thj  felf ,  fCCCiVi.       tVilt  thou  he  pcrfwaded  by  experience  f     Confider  thy  intpnfonwents,  thy  af- 

j  .  ned.  fiiClion  and  jhame  of  body.      Confider  the  love  of  a  few,  and  envy  of  a   multitude.      Wtigb  with 

thy  felf  the  vanity  of  thy  life  ;   Ihy  rajh  foot-jieps.  All  that  bappned  unto  thee,  by  the  fociety,   and 

(^  as  th:»  thinl{elr  )  comfort  ;  tut  indeed  the jiingingprickj  of  thy  enemies 

......     Since,  we  came  into  thee,  (^fent  from  the  Lord,  and  calling  thee,  to  God  )  tlxuhaji  bet* 

'^  eUlivired  fern  thtm  ;  frtm  a  place  full  of  fornication,  and  the  wrath   of  Cod:    exalud  to  tU 

skirts  of  worldly  h*  i-our ;  and  haji  bttn  fatisfiedfcr  the  nectfities  of  this  World.  Hdy  is  the 
money  that  m gotten righteoufly  ;  but  accp.rfed  aretke  tvilt  thsttare  reaped  witllttrong. 

AU 


A  true  delation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  mtb  fpirits,  &c,        m  7 


A/I  which  things  thou  hafl  ky  us  in  blejfe/iittjfey  end  in  the  kjtowledge  of  the  will  of  God  ,  a'^ove  all 
men.  Befides  our  continual  frefence  with  thee,  to  the  comfort  of  thy  Soul.  Even  thefe  things  are 
of  u!,  ini  of  our  G  d.  If'^hich  [ware  unto  Ahrahxm^  and  dwellHh  in  the  Temple  of  righteoufneffe. 
Now^thfrefore  let  experience  he  a.  Judge  betwixt  uf  and  them. 

Buty  this  fayctb  the  Lird.  I  deal  with  you  as  a  Childe :  But  the  vejfeli  that  I  mujl  ufe  ,  m:ijl  he  p^^J.    rr . 
fure  and  clean".^ 

A.  Clcanfe  thou  us,  (O  Lord)  Cor  mundum  Crea  inmbishCrea. 

Gab Tkej  that  are  incredulous  believe  not  the  Lordy  but  drive  away  his  fpirit  :  But  where 

g^grxin  isyit  becometh  M  a.  mountain.         The  Lord  is  upon  the  earth  :  Tak^e  heed  thou  fweep  thy  ^^*"^'*^'' 
boufe  clean,  for  unto  htm  that  is  nal{ed,Jhall  there  be  Clo at hes  given :  But  be  that  is  Covered   al- 
ready, (hall  he  made  bare. 

Confider  with  thy  [elf  :  for  the  Lord  fpea\etb  not  once  more ,  till  t!iOU  z&d:/  fulfilled  thy  own 
judgement. 

E,  K.  \  will  be  contented  to  bury  them  in  the  field,  and  not  ta  ufe  h;s  own 
them  ,  or  come  at  them  :  and  that  I  will  fwear  upon  the  Bible  to  per-  ^obf  html-' 
fonn  :  and  if  they  be  earthly,  I  will  commit  them  to  the  earth  :  and  fo  ''"'• 
fcparate  thole  Ihingles  from  the  place  near  the  fpring  :  and  in  this  man- 
ner fulfill  my  own  judgement :  For,  /  rvill  not  be  objtinate  ,  hut  commit 
all  things  to  the  end. 

Beca'ife  thou  art  content  to  bury  them  ;  andwithall,  upon  faith  in  the  promifes  of  God,  to  ab- 
jure theM  in  fjmp'icity  of  heartland  external  ufe,..-fimply,as  a.  true  meaning  before  the  face  of 
Tie  higheji :  Ihe  Lord  acceptethit,  and  it  pallbe  fi/fficient. 

Further^  thou  had  27.  Co«^rw^ti9«i  <>/yj«j  and  confent  with  the  Devil,  which  your  intention 
callethCh3vndiers,whereby  thoje  [even  and  twenty  ,  Q  ike  unto  the'r  mother^    are  become  fami-  Charaftsrw 
liar  ani  plczfant  with  thee,  they  mii(i  be  brought  before  the  Lord:  ani  offered  into  his  hands. 
For  fo  !on£^  as  they  are,  the  wicked  alwayes  vex  thee  :  For  the  Obligation  burnt,  tlie  condi- 
tion is  void.      lbe(e  muft  bf  brriedwitb  the  relh 

[£.  K,  Which  reft  ?] 

But  muft  be  brought,  and  burnt  here  before  the  prefence  of  God:  Thatithe  caufe  dimi- 

uijfjed^  the  effeU  may  perijh. 

E.  K.  I  will  be  contented  to  bury  them  likewife  ,  befeeching  the 
Almighty  to  accept  of  my  intent  herein  ,  as  of  the  reft  before  fpeci- 
fied. 

Heif  content  rd;  hut  let  one  be  burnt.     Tou  may  fHftr  one  to  teiii^c  the  difcrcdit  of  the 

reft.     It  if  but  accordingto  the  grounds  of  t\}y  ownMngick. 

E.  K.  I  do  not  undcrftand  your  meaning  herein. 

Gab. .«...  Radiui  partif,  may  he  ficut  tottus  Corporif, 

E.  K.  I  underftand  not  that,  alfo. 

Gab CMagtck.  worketb   effelf  in  things  ahfent  ^  that   it  doth   in  their    parts ,  ^rw| 

Jtefent. 

The  wicked  kjll  the  body  alfent,  but  the  garment  present  :  fo   are  all  of  one  confederacie ,   dif-  A.  /  doubt 
fXaced  by  the  confufioH  of  one.        Thou  art  contrnted  to  bury  them  M,upon  the  confidence  ,  and  that!  mif- 
fure  hope  of  the  promifes  of  the  God  of  light,  and  to  bring  one  as  a  confirmation  of  thy  promife  to  te  -  ^V^^^  ^°'°'^* 
jiifie  thy  obedience  as  concerning  the  whole  :  wh'^ch  one  burnt  and  abjured  ,  may  be  a  tejHmony  onV bumr, 
totheAtgels,  that  thou  art  obedient  for  God  his  fake,  and  for  his  tcftimony  and  truth.     But  md  abjured 
tbifyoH  (hall  burn  with  Brimhne  on'ly.    IVhofe  afhes  (hallbe'kjpt  as  a  teilimony  ,  till  the  reft    be  obedience. 
alfo  confumed.        X^'V  jo«>'^//do  the  next  Monday  at  the  rifing  of  the  Sun.     That   the 
number  of  the  time  may  be  of  one  bigneffe.     For,  before  Auguji  fliall  thofe  Kcyes  be  delivered 
unto  you :   which  give  entrance,  yea,  even  into  the  privy  Chambers  of  wifdom,  whereof  you 
/Ii all  have   14.  the  next  Monday.   And  this  dayes  aiiion  is  not  the  leaji  amongji  them.   Glory  be  te  ...ence. 
G}d  ,  and  obedience  unto  man. 

E.  K.  The  Curtain  is  drawn. 

A.  We  are  dcfirous  to  know  whether  thus,thisdayes  a£tion  Ihall  be  finifhcd;  and  whether 
we  fhall  fait  ftill  as  was  prefcribed. 

Gab VetraS  not  fiom  the  day,  that,  which  is  commanded. 

A.  We  are  xery  defirous  to  underftand  of  the  prefent  eftate  of  the  Lord  Albert  Laskie  :  for 
«s  much  as  we  were  willed  to  go  with  him,  and  he  linked  to  us  in  fome  par^  of  our  aftions  : 
To  underftand  of  his  fhte,  would  be  to  our  great  comfort. 

Gab.  ....,  It  needfth  not^for  the  world  her  felf  is  at  hand. 

A.  Vcrily,l  underftand  not  that  fpeoch:Ii  he  coining  back  agairi?What,  Wearc  commanded 

O-  we 


I!  ^       tJ  true  Illation  of  D^^  L>e  his  Jclions  nuhjpirits,  6:c. 


we  know  :  j[iid  further  then  cvr  Commandment  ^  errour.    He  is  in  his  hand  that  knoweth  liow 
to  u(e  him. 

E.  K.  I  fjbe  a  inan  climlng  over  a  Hedge  ,  and  as  he  clainmerctli 
over  rhe  flakes  break  ,  and  he  falleth  down.  Now  he  is  going  up  be- 
tween two  Trees  into  a  Medow-ward.  Now  he  hath  both  the  boughs 
in  his  hand ,  ftanding  ftill  on  the  ground.    Now  he  goeth  lower,  there 

is  a  gap,  and  through  that  he  is  gone   into  the  Medow fo  it  is  of 

Lail{ie faid  a  voyce. 

A.  This  is  dark  :  it  may  pleafe  you  to  give  fome  light. 

* Ti5if  *f  more  then  e/toughfor  the  matter. 

Ceafe  to  as  k^  thefe  things  hercy  where  it  k  faid^  no  impure  thing  fljittld  enter. 

A.  Gloria,  I'lisSi  honor  Deo  Nofcro  Oninipoccnti,Patri,fiiio  &  fpiritui  Saufto,    nunc 
&  fcniper.       Amen- 
ta, Note,  at  this  prefent  was  one  come,  and  in  the  houfe  (of  whom  we  imderftood  not  till 
lit  was  gone : )  whom  the  Lord   A.  Loihje  had  feiit  to  certifie  us,  that   flrft  he  was  in  fomc 
cumber  and  hmdrance.     Secondly,  how  Fahitu  (  his  brother  in  Law  )  and  another  had  given 
hmi  connfel,  very  rafniy  to  proceed  :  But  leaving  that.    Thirdly,  hy  the  gap  and  open  way 
with  eftate  of  the  Comn'ons,  or  Citizens,  by  their  great  Zeal ,  and  ftvour  that  he  obtained 
hif.  purpofe.    This  (in  efFfft)  we  underftood  ar  the  Meffager  his  return  afternoon.     Wiiich 
(JUaj.  marvellous  exaftly  did  anfwer  to  the  former  (hew. 

Remember  that  on  Saturday  after  noon,  the  Chancelour  came  to  Cracow  ,  with  60  Coaches 
in  his  Company  and  train  :  he  bringing  iu  a  clofe  Coach  (covered  with  red)  the  Lord  Sa^ 
iww/ 5.JBoro.'/;/>  Prifoner,  whom  he  took  on  Friday  night  before  ,  athisiifters  houfe,  being 
feparated  from  his  Souldicrs  and  fervants,  &c. 


S^turd^y,  i^MzUy  Mane  hor'i  6  Fere.         t  Cracoviae. 

Orationem  Dominicam  fudimm,  &c.  Mitte  lucem  tuam  &  veritatem  ,   0  Vem^^c. 
A.   £,  K.   Said,  he  had  done  fliat  with  tfce  trafli  fpecified,  as  he  thoughtwould  be  accepta- 
ble to  the  Lord  :  And  as  concerning  one  of  the  27    Charafters  he  had  left  it  with  me  ,  ever 
fince  the  laftaftion,to  be  burnt  at  this  dayes  aftion,  and  it  lay  ready  by  me. 

E.  K.  Our  inftruclours  appeared  at  the  very  firft  looking  of  E.  K.  in- 
to the  (hew-ftone. 

A.   W  ill  you  that  1  fhallnow  exeaitc  this  burning  of  the  Charafter  here  as  a  facrificc  (to 
die  hightft)    four  humility  and  obedience? 

Gab. Not  iii  a  facrtflce.,  but  as  a  vidory. 

A.  Shall /then  do  it, /pray  you  ?  As  with  the  confcnt  of  my  yoke-fellow ,  and  fo  all  one 
to  be  taken  as  his  aftion. 

He  that  doth  righteafy  cffereth  up  a  facyifice. 

■  .'Nal It  is  true,  that  he  that  u  obedhnty  and  doth  well.,   is  accepted  with  the  Lord. 

E.  K.  I  did  take  facrifice  to  be  onely  with  bloud. 

Gab.   ....  This  is  a  facrifice,  hecanfe  it  is  done  right eoufly. 

E.  K.   You  faid,  Not,  as  a  facrifice,  but  as  a  vitlory. 

Gab He  that  overcometh  his  enetnjr  rejoyceth  not  far  friendjhip  fake ,  hut  for  vi&ory.       Tie 

jriendpip  toward  Cod  is  obedience.  He  that  oleyeth  God ,  is  a  fiend  unto  himfelf.  Cei 
needeth  not  the  love ,  or  fiendfhip  of  man,  Therefore  yon  rejoyce  with  God,  who  overthrew  thentf 
and  thereby  comforted.        for  he  that  dwelleth  in  the  Lord  is  comforted. 

Thou  cfenefi  thy  mouth,  andfayeji  before  the  Lord,      The  fpirit  of  God  hath  defcended. 
'■^A.  He  no.      A.  Gloria  Patri,  &c. 

<:*(«  dfbou*fe       -^'"^  *^  *"'*  entred  into  judgement  with  me,  and  J  am  condemned.       But  where  JulHce  dwtUetby 
WK^'tiiion^  or  dwelleth  alfo  mercy.       For,  try  Idolatry  is  forgotten  before  the  Lord. 

prayer,ana»i-      £.  K.  Havc  vou  Committed  Idolatry  ? 

foaftionof  •'  V       V 

F.K.  a.  Icon-  \n      ,      ,    .  ,    ,    .^  L.      K. 

jcaure.  A.  He  fpeaketh  inyour  behalf  Mafter  Kf/^. 

i  ffill  therefore  open  mj  mouth.,  fa)  ing,  I  have  erred.       I  will  open  my  mouth  alfo, and  conf 

feffe-yryfnis  :  And,  \  will  vow  unto  rhe  Lord  againil  the  wicked.     And   I  will  fay  imto  th« 
Lord.     Loyhcrearethefpbihcf  the  blcudy  blafphemy.        Behold  ^0  yoH  Angeh,a  blafpjemy,  and 
,    figainf}  the  higheji.     lehold^  the  Wickjtc}  ejjt  oj  Alccndam, 

Eear 


(9^true  ^elaUon  of  D"*.  Dee  his  J^ftons  mth  fpirits^  (See-       1 1^ 

Bear  witncffi  with  mty  for  I  have  fulfilled  his  Commandement.   Bear  witness  fv'ith  me,  that  I am  in 

return  nor,  and  rej'jce;  for  ft*cb  are  thefpoj/es  of  the  wici^ed.  '^  /'• 

Gab.  Art  thou  contented  to  confent  hereunto? 


.  ..ero 
...no: 

/ 

and 

itf 

...( eH, 


E.  K.  What  I  have  done  with  the  reft,  God,  .ind  they  (if  they  be  of 
God)  know  :  upon  the  forefaid  conditions  I  am  contented  to  have  this 
Charafler  to  be  burnt.   Let  it  be  burnt. 

A.    1  biiriu  it  immediately  ,   with  the  flame  of  brimftoiiej  and  brought  the  biirnt  black  coa! 
or  cinder  thereof  to  the  Tabic  ,  and  laid  it  on  a  paper. 

Now  0  Lordydarkjtejfe  is  confounded^  let  thy  light  flnne  in  us,  and  thy  truth  prevaile. 
Gab.  It  is  well.     ^.  BlclTed  be  the  name  of  the  highell  :   whofe  mercies  are  infinite. 
Oh,  a  fweet  and  comfortable  fentence. 

E*  K.  Now  'Nal'vage  turneth  round,  as  he  was  wont. 

Gab.   Move  not,  for  the  place  is  holy. 

E.  K.  Now  Nali/age  putteth  down  his  rod  to  the  Table,he  maketh  a 
croffe  upon  the  Table  reverently. 

Nal.  All  things  go  forwards,  Let  uf  g»  FORWARD  alfo.     £k.   Jii  the  name  of  Jcfiis^     fi„  ^ 

Gab.  Move  not,  for  the  place,  ii  holj. 

E.  K.    Nal'vage  prayeth. 

Nal.  Not  ^  y< C K  i^ -4  ^ Z) ,  as  you  were  wont  to  do,  but  F  0  KW  ART). 

E.  iiC.  Now  he  maketh  three  reverent  Curfies,  as  he  was  wont  to  do, 
before  the  Table. 

S  A  P  A  H  Si  pah.     ^ 

Sapf.b* 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  on  the  top  of  the  Table. 


ZIMII 
DUIV 
OD 

E.K.  He  maketh  curfy. 

NOAS 

T  A  (lA  N I S 

ADROCH 

DORPHAL 

CAOSG 
OD 

FAONTS 

PIRIPSOL 

TABLIOR 

CASARM 

AMIPZI 

NAZARTH 

AF 
OD 

DLUGAR 


a2 


Z't  tuii. 
Du  iv, 
Od. 

Nms. 

"la. qua  nis, 

as  otc1} 
Ad  roch. 

DorphaL 

Ca  osg 
Od. 

¥*  onts. 
Fir  ipfol, 
Tiblior. 
Cafarni, 
A  mip  zc 
No.  zartb, 

Af. 
Od. 

Vlugar 


I.L4>1^. 


OD. 

*>.<no 
....  reth 

....pone 


E.  K, 


no       A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  hu  Jclions  mthfiirits,  5cc. 


E.  IC.  Now  he  maketh  curiy  roundabout  to  all    p^irts  of  the  Table, 
he  kncelcth  down. 

Z  1  Z  O  P  Zi  z*;, 

Zod  lidit 

It  if  a  Word  and  a  he  tier. 

E .  K.  He  fhew  cth  it  not  m  the  Table  yet. 

Nal.    'No-if  I  ff  e  the  werd  of  five  Letters  together y  following  letter  hy  letter, 
ZLIDA 


C  AOSGI 
TOLTORGI 

OD 


Stajf   there. 


Z  d-lida. 
Z  i'dn. 


C«  OS  gi, 

T'oltirgL 


He  maketh  now  Curfy. 

Od 


E.  K.  He  fcemeth  to  read  as  Hebrew  is  read. 

ZIZOP  Zizo^.  'I 

ZCHIS  Zodchh 

Nal.   ff  is  better  than  the  ether  ,f  mean  that  Zod-chis  being  of  'One  fignificetlon^'vhiiZixAp^at 

Zod-chis  is  better  to  be  vfed. 


ESIAS.CH 

E  fiaci. 

L 

L. 

TAUIU 

"jta  ui  a. 

OD 

Gd. 

lAOD 

na,    . 

E.  K.  Now  he  maketh  curfy  again. 

THILD 

Thildj  one  Sjllahlg. 

Now  he  ma 

DS. 

4s, 

HUBAR. 

Hubar, 

PEOAL 

feifl. 

Cdtnps 
I.  69, 
5.  Julit 

(aexpoundea. 

SOBA 

E.K.-— 

Soba. 

CORMFA 

Cormfd, 

CHISTA 

Chists. 

LA 

VLS 

La: 

Vis.] 

OD 


Od. 


QjCOCASB 


(oyftrue  Relation  of  D"^.  Dee  his  Anions  mth  fpirits,  (Sec*       i  ii 


QCOCASB  ^ocasb. 

N 1 1  S  Ni  is. 

OD  Od. 

D  A  R  B  S  Obey  Varbs-one  Syllable. 

CLA  A  S  §^  as. 

S.  FETHARZI  Fethirzi. 

K.  E.  Curfy. 

E.  K.  He  hath  drawn  tfre  Curtain. 

It  is  Kat  to  be  feen  what  he  doth. 
L,  of  4  minutes  of  time  the  Curtain  was  drawn. 

E.  K.  He  is  now  otherwife  apparelled,  all  the  oiitfide  of  his  Gown  is 
>  white  Furre,  on  his  head  is  an  attire  of  furre,  wreathed  or  wrapped  as 
the  Turks  ufe^  his  head  is  now  ike  a  mans  head,  with  Oiort  hair. 

OD  *  Od.  '   ' 

BLIORA  Bliira.  ^'''^^' 

I  A  I  A  L  la  ial. 

EDNAS  Ed  Mas. 

CI  C  L  E  S  Ci  cles, 

EAGLE  Bigle. 


ie  in  as  ten  tit  iad-as  jade, 
Ge  ]ad. 

il. 


That  is  one  Call. 

,h.....„.Move»otyfor  the  place  is  holly. 


"^AH  Gab. 

SDIU  esdiu 

Sdiu. 

-HIS  Chis. 

E  M  Ew. 

M  I C  A  L  Z  O  Micilzo 

E.  K.   Curfy,  and  he  kifleth  the  Table. 

I    PILZIN  filzen. 

Pilzin. 


b. 


E.  K    The  Curtain  is  now  plucked  again,  for  three  minutes  or  four, 
^owthe  Curtain  is  opened  again.     Now  is  he  changed.  Now  he  isH!sappard. 

all 


Ill       A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBions  wthjpirits, 

,&c.        " 

— __ — — 

iffc,  girded  to  him, 

all  in  black  farcenet,  very  plentifull  of  fti 

and  with 

the  coller  high  to  the  midft  of  his  face. 

S  O  B  A  M                   * 

Sob  am. 

EL. 

el 

HARG 

urgtntm. 
Harg, 

MIR 

Mir. 

PlZiN 

Tiz,in. 

babalon 

Babiltn. 

Tut  out  the  lajl  THgin. 

E.  K.  Why  did  you  give  us  them? 

\ 

Nal ,.Ifftftand. 

OD 

u. 

OBLOG 

«h  ke. 

s  amvelo 

Sam  vt!g. 

DLUOAR 

Vlugar.  , 

MALPURO 

Mai  fur g. 

ARCAOSOI 

Jr  c*  if  gi* 

OD 

a 

ACAM 

J  dm 

CANAL 

SdH*l. 

Cantl. 

• 

SOBOLIAR 

So  hi  xar 

AT..         TBLIARD 

Tbli  ard. 

It  k  bttter  iftht  th«  made  en  F,  'ini  fre»emced  F  bli  W. 

CAOSGI 

Co.  osgi. 

ODCHIF 

K'f- 
Oi  chif. 

ii 

ANETAB 

A  He  t*b. 

OD 

oi* 

MI  AM 

Miam, 

TAVIV 

'in  vi  V, 

-t 

ODD 

on. 

i 

DARSAR 

Varfar 

SOLP.ETH 

Solfethi 

BIEN 

Bi  en. 

,^ 

BRITA 

B  ri  ta. 

m>ti 

A  true  ^I^eUtion  of  D'.  Dee  bis  JUtom  mth  fpirits,  (3cc,       1 1 } 

The  Curtain  drawn  again.     Now  it  is  opened. 
He  is  altered  in  apparel ;  one  half  under  the  girdle  is  red, and  above 
the  girdle  white. 

O  D  Od. 

Z  x\  C  ••  A  M  ,  Ztf  earn. 

GMICALZO  G-nic'ilzo. 

SOBHAATH  Soh  hi  ath. 

T  R  I  A  N  •  tr'tan. 

^  .....  HE  LuUhe. 

O  DECK  IN  Odecr'm. 

Curfie. 

M  AD  Mad. 

Q_A  A  O  N  ^tftfM. 

Ihitt  is  tk(  fecond. 
A.  BlefTed. 

f    R  A  A  S  Raai. 

IS  ALMA  N  I  Salman. 

P  A  R  A  ••  I  Z  Taradi  Kid. 

OECRIM  I  0  kcTimi. 

A  A  O  A  Ao. 

Tal. 
lALPiRGAH  lALprgab,    . 

E.  K.   The  Curtain  drawn  again,  and  fo  remaind  about  6  minutes. 
E.  K.  Being  weary  of  fitting,  1  would  gladly  have  leave  to  walk  a 
little.  His  Apparel  all  one  as  it  was. 

Nal Tou  may  ;  lut  to  fit y  it  wfcrf  obedient. 

A.  E.K.  walked  awhile. 

E  K.  Now,  when  it  pleafe  you. 

Gab I  feel  a/iaggiriHC  minde. 

A.  That  God  which  created  you  and  us,  make  us  to  have  conftant  mindes  in  all  vertuous 
purpofes. 

Cab I  [wear  :  Move  not  ;  for  the  place  is  holj. 

CLUIIN  ^iin. 

EN  AY  Enaj. 

BUTMON  ButmoH. 

OD  oi. 

l;/;  -ir,  '  I  NO  AS 


\ 


14       A  true  Relation  ofjy.  Dee  his  Mions  vpithfpirits,  &c,       ji^ 


INOAS 
NI 

E.  K.  He  pi-aycth. 
PAR  AD  1 AL 
C  AS  AR.MG 
V  G  E  A  R 
CHIRLAN 
OD 

ZONA  .. 
LUClFTI  AN 
CORSTA 
VAULZIRN 
TOLHAMI 
SOB  A 
LONDOH 


Ih  9  Of. 

Ni. 

Pa  re  di  tl. 

Cufirmg,  Thc^  as  <£^^  irmg, 

V  ge  tir. 
Kir. 

Chir  Ian, 

Od. 

Zo  Mac, 
Lu  cifti  an. 
Con  ta^ 
Viulzirn. 
to! hi  mi. 

Saba, 

LoH  dob. 


The  Curtain  is  drawn  again  :  and  after  6  minutes  open. 
Now  he  is  all  in  a  blew  long  vefture,  with  a  long  train  ■■,  and  hath  a 
little  Coronet  of  Silver  on  his  head. 


O  D  M  I  A  M 
CHIST  AD 
ODES 

Curfic. 
VM.DEA 

OD 

PIBLIAR 

O  T  H I L  R I  T 

ODMI  A  M 

CNOQJJOL 

RIT 

Z  AC  AR 

ZAMRAN 


•  c. 


Od.  mi  MtHy  or  OdNuim, 
Kit 
Cbif  tad. 

0  des. 


V  mi  de  g. 

Od. 

Pih  It  ar. 
O  thilrit. 

Od  mi  am. 

Kol. 
Cno  qml. 

Kit. 

Z«  cur, 

Zam  rait. 


OECB.IMI 


I 


Atme^elation  ofT>^>  Dee  his  Actions  withfpirits,  <5cc.        125' 


OECRIMI 
CLADA: 
OD 

OMIC  AOLZ 
A  AIOM 
BiA  G  L  E 
p APN  O  R 

Ciirfie  he  maketh. 
IDLllGAM 
LON  SHI 

OD 

VMPLlF 
VGEGI 
UIGLI  A.. 


/" 


O  c  crimi. 
^i  dah. 
Od. 

Omicaolzod. 
A  A  I  om. 
Ea  gle. 
Fa^  Hor, 

Id  'k  gaw. 

Lonflii, 

Od. 

Vmplif. 

VGegi. 

Bigliad. 


Nal "tbi^  ii  at  an  end. 

A.  BlelTed  be  he  that  is  the  beginning  and  ending  of  all  things. 

E.  K.  The  Curtain  is  pluckt. 

Now  it  is  open,  and  he  is  all  in  green,  with  a  Garland  on  his  head. 


«    BAZMELO 

Baz,  me  lo. 

I  T  A 

Ixa. 

pi  R I  P  S%'^ 

tW'tjfon, 

OLN 

Oln. 

' N AZAVABH 

Ka  za  v'ihh. 

OX 

Ox. 

C  AS ARMG 

Cafarmg, 

G  or  V    RAN 

Vrin. 

CHIS 

Chii. 

* 

VGEG 

Vgtg- 

.'SABRAMO 

Dfa  bramg.  [  g  HQt  Oi  dg.J 

B ALTOH A 

Bal  td  ha. 

E.  K,  The  Curtain  is  drawn,  for  a  while 

R 

Now 

illJT   \i^ 


iz6       A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee^ix  ABionsmthffmtSy^c. 


Now  is  in  a  Robe  like  a  Marble  colour  fpotted,  white,  gray,  and 
black. 
G  O  H  O  I  A  D  GohSitd. 

S  O  L  A  M I  A  N  Soli  mi  an. 

Fire  came  fiiddenly  out  of  ths  Stone,  that  made  E.  K.  ftart. 

T  R  I  A  N  ^ri  m. 

E.K.  Now  he  kneeleth. 

"To.  lot  cisorfis. 
Aha'tuo  nin- 
OD. 


T  ALOLCIS 
ABAIUON  IN 

OD 


E.  K.  He  fctteth  his  fopt  on  a  letter,  Jointing  to  it.     He  throweth 
fire  on  E.  K.  again. 


tbdc  letters. 


HeputtethUs      A  Z  I  A  G  I  A  R 
feet    on    all 

RIOR 

IRGlLCHlSbA 
DSP  A  A  OX. 
BLI  FD 
GAOSGO 
DSCHIS 

odipuran 
teloah 

CACRC5 
OISALM  AN 
LONCHO 
OD 

VOUIN A 
CA  RBAF 
N  IISO 
BAGLE 
A  LI  A  U  A  G  O 
GOH  ON 
NIISO 


A  x,ii  gi  efi 
Rior. 

trgil  ch'isia, 
Vfpi  €  ox, 

Ca»  or  Ka  of  go. 
T>s  chit, 
Cdi  fu  rait. 
Teloah. 
Ca  curg. 
0  i  fal  man. 
LOH  choy  or  ^». 
Od. 

Vo  ui  Hai 
Car  baf. 
Niifo. 
Ba  gle. 
A  ui  uago. 
Go  hon. 

Niifo. 


bagle 


A  true  delation  of  D^.  Dee  his  ABions  mth/pirits,  &c,        i  zj 
BAGLE  b7^.      ^"  "  ~~~ 

^,  Hccafteth  fire  on  E.  K. 

MOM  AO                            •  Mo  ma  0, 

S  lAION  Si  a  i  ,u. 

OD  .                    \   Od. 

M  A  B  Z  A  C^iab  za. 

E.  K.   He  makcth  a  ciirl'ie,  he  laycth  Mab'x.a  again. 

lADOlASMOMAR  '    lad  o  i  as  mo  mar. 
POILP  ?oil^,one  [yllabk. 

NIIS  Ni  iiy  fmall  found  of  i. 

Z  A  M  R  A  N  Zam  ran. 

E.  K.  The  Curtain  is  drawn ,  white ,  and  reddiOi  ,  more  red  then 
white  :  Now  it  is  away,  and  all  open  again  :  Now  all  his  Gown  is  yel- 
low and  yellow  furrc  in  iti  and  on  his  head,  a  Hoode  of  yellow  like  Vel- 
vet, &c. 

E.  K.  Why  change  you  your  Apparel  thus : 

E.  K.  He  ipeaketh  very  ipccdily  to  Gabriel,  but  I  cannot  perceive 
liim. 

C I A  O  F  I  C  I  A  0  fi. 

C  A  O  S  G  O  Ka. 

Ca  of  gO' 

OD  OV. 

BLI....S  B/i    ers. 

OD  OB. 

COR....  Corf. 

TA  1't 

ABR  AMfG  A  bra  mig. 

This  is  the  end  of  that. 

E.  K.  Now  he  pullcth  the  Curtain  :  Now  it  opencth  again.  His 
Apparel  is  now  changed  again  of  an  Afhy  and  brown  colour,  in  faihioh 
as  before. 

Gab who  is  to  be  compared  to  our  God  ? 


M  I  C  A  O  L I  Oi'li  ca  0  li. 


B  R  A  N  S  G  Branfg, 

P- .  G  E  L  Pur  gel. 

N  A  P  T  A  Nap  ta. 
S^IALPOR  yal 


I  AL  por, 

R  2  :  DSBRIN 


12^ 

%4  true  "Relation  of  I>^  Dee  his  Mions  mhJfmts.^Ci 

D  S  B  R  1  N                                                  Vi  hrin. 

...  F  A  F  E                                                    £  /-»  /«  /'• 

:.otia  ^ 

thus  ^ 

A 

F 

X 

'  V  ON  P  H  O                                                  Von  fho, 
O  L'  A  N  r                                                      0  L  *  Mi, 

X- 

OD                                                             ^'^• 

O  B  Z  A                                                      <>l>za. 

i  SOBCA                                                 '     R' 

Sob   ca. 

VPAAH                                                      V  t'-  "''• 

C  H  I  S                                                      CbU. 

T  A  T  A  N                                      ,        ^*  **''• 

OD                                                          ^^ 

T  R  A  N  A  N  7'r«  uan. 

B  A  L  Y  E  B«  /y  #. 

£.  /f .  Now  he  turneth  round  about.     He  maketh  a  curfie.  So  doth 

Gaby /el. , 

L«f  (^<'- 

Chis  hoi  q. 
Cito   quo  di. 

Si  i, 
Ci  al. 

V  nal. 
Al  den. 
Mom, 

Co-  of  gi, 

ta. 

Lot  el  lor. 
Gnay. 

E.  K.  He  plucketh  the  Cuitainjand  quickly opcneth  it, 
rndfaverh-  '         1         /    r  '  ^.  This  word 

ToH  wwff  after  E  //» /*  /f ,  fnt  a  P.  backward, 


ALAR 

LUSDA 

so;bpln 

QD 

CHISHOLCL 

C  N  O  CLV  O  D  I 

5    CIAL 

V  N  AL 

ALDON 

MOM 

CAOSGO 

T  A 

LA.  LLOR 

GNAY 

E.  K.   My 


A  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dec  his  JBions  mth  fpirits,  <5cc,       i  ip 


E.  K.  My  thinkcth  that  I  hear  a  rumbling,  or  clattering  of  Pewter 
in  the  ftonc. 

E.  K.  After  he  had  fpoken  ,  he  /hut  the  Curtain  again  :  Now  the 
Curtain  is  opened  again. 


L  I M  L  A  L  Lim  hi. 

A  M  M  A  Ammx. 

C  H  1  I  S  Chtit. 

S  O  B  C  A  Ka. 

Seh  ca. 

.  A  D  R  I  D  cW/t  drid 

ZCHIS  Ki*. 

Zod  ChU. 

OOANOAN  OoAman. 

CHI.  Chit. 

AVINY  Avlny. 

D  R  I  L  P  I  Tfril  pi. 

C  A  O  S  G  I  N  Ca  of  gin, 

OD  Od 

BUT  MO  N  I  But  m  Mi. 

FARM  Pjirm. 

Z  U  M  V  I  Zum  vi. 

CNIL  A  CniU. 

D  A  Z I  ,  Dtiz.  it. 

E  T  H  A  M  Z  £  than  Zod^ 

ACHILDAO  KiL 

A  chil  da  t, 

OD  Od. 

MIR.  Mirkj 

M  ire, 

O  Z  O  L  OzoU 

CH  .  .  ChU. 

PIDIAI  Ti  di  Hi. 


i  ■/' 


COLLA 


130        A  tme "[(elation  ofD\  Dee  his  Mions  mthfpirits,  &c 

COL  LA..  CollaL 

VLCININ  ^  Vlcinin. 

ASOBAMA  Afobam. 

II  C  I M  '^  <^'»'' 

BAGLE  ^'^g^^' 

lA.BALTOH  Jadbaluk. 

CHIRLAN  J^ir. 

Chir  Ian. 

PAR  ^''''• 

Nil..  Nli  fo.^ 


OD 


Od. 


1  p                                                  ^  Ip- 

O  .  .  .  A  F  E  0  ft  fa  fe. 

BAGLE  ^^  g^*-- 

ACOCASB  ^co  «'«^' 

ICORSCA  ^« 

I  Cars  ea. 

V  N  I  G  V  nig. 

BLIOR  ^^'">^' 

E.  K.  Now  the  Curtain  is  drawn. 

A  voyce.  The  end  of  thdt. 

4k.  This  is  the  fifth  of  this  day. 

E.  K.  Now  is  the  Curtain  Open.  All  his  Cloaths  are ryjvcry 

clear,whitifh,  and  blewilh. 

C  O  R  A  X  O  Co  rax  0. 

C  H  I  S  Chit. 

CORM  .                                           .       '  Cornip. 

OD  Od. 

BLANS 


(d^true  ^I{elatton  of  D^  Dee 

his  ABions  mhfpirits,  ^c- 

13' 

BLANS . 

BUftS' 

■....U....A  L 

Ln  caL 

\   AZI R 

Az,l  a  «»r. 

PAEB 

faeb. 

SOBA 

Soia, 

LILONON                  ^■ 

Li  lo  Hon. 

CHIS 

Chis. 

auu 

riiq. 

i    EOPHAN 

E  0  pban. 

OD 

od. 

Betvceu  Chis  andVirq^youmiiji pth 

t  Op  A  word. 

R  A  C  L  I  R 

F.a  c/ir. 

MA 

Ml  a  ft. 

bagle 

Ba.  gle. 

SGI 

Co.  ofgi. 

[   DS 

ds. 

1  ALP  ON 

DOSIG 

OD 

rai 

tti  big. 
Do  fig. 

Odi 

teASGiM 

B*s  gim. 

OD. 

Od. 

OXEX 

Ox  ex. 

DAZIS 

Daz  is. 

....lATRIS 

Siatris: 

CD 

Od. 

5ALBROX 

Sal hrex. 

CINXIR 

Cynx  ir. 

F....BOAN 

Fa.  bt  an. 

|.   UN  ALCHIS 

Vnilcbii; 

['CONST 
DS 

k, 

ds. 

• 

1  DAOX 
COCASG 

Vaex 
e  as  df. 

5^7S- 

G*  easg. 

OL 


5^       A  true  Relation  o/'D^  Dee  his  ABions  mth/pirits,  dec. 


OL 

OANlO 

YOR 

V  O  H 1  M 

OL 

GIZ  Y  AX 

OD 

EORS 

C  O  C 

PLOS... 

M I 

DS 

P  AGEIP 

L  ARAG 

OM 

DROLN 

COCASB 

EMNA 

LPATRALX 

YOLCI 

MA  TORE 

01. 
0  inio 
Tor. 

Voh  im. 

01 

Gix.y  ax 
Od. 

E  or  St 

g<io. 
dg. 
Co  Casgi 

Flofu 

Mil  ui. 
ds 

Ti  ge  if. 

La  rag. 

Om. 

iroln 

Co  cash, 

Em  Ha 

El. 

L  pi  tralx, 

lolp. 

Ma  torb. 


this  word  muji  come  next  after  Om  droln. 

E.  if.  Now  he  pulleth  the  Curtain. 

A.  This  Om  droln  is  before  four  words.    The  Curtain  Is  open  away.    He  is  in  (lis  flamin, 
apiiarell. 


NOMIG 

MONO  N3 

OLORA 

GNA  Y 

ANGELARD 

OHIO 

OHIO 

OHIO 

OHIO 

OHIO 


h''g>     - 
No  migi 

Mo  nous, 

0  lo  ra. 

Gnay. 

An  ge  lard. 

0  hi  0. 

0  hio. 
0  hi  0. 
Ohio. 
0  hi  0, 


OHIC 


O  H  lO"  '  ^^~ 


NOIB  -                                                  ^„.^^ 

OHIO  Ohio. 

CAO-  GON  Caifgon. 

B  A  G  L  E  nagle. 

MADRID  M^tdrid. 

I  /. 

ZIROP  zirop. 

C  H  I  S  O  chifo. 

DRILPA  Vrilfa. 

NllSO  ^iifg^ 

CRIP  Crif. 

IP  If, 
NIDALI  Nid*lu 
A  voice,             the  end  of  that  dill.     ^.  This  is  th^  fixth. 

The  Curtain  is  drawn.     He  appeareth  now  all  in  violet  Silk  like  a 
Cloke,  and  on  his  head  a  bundel  wreathed  of  the  fame. 

6  XI  AY  A  L  OxiJjai. 

HOLDO  Hoi  do. 

OD  Od. 

.  I  ROM  Zirom. 

o  o. 

CORAXO  Corixof 

DS  '                                       Ds, 

2ILDAR  Zildar. 

RAASY  Kaajy. 

O  D  Od. 

VABZIR  r*i2/r. 

C  A  M  L  I  A  X  Cam  It  ax. 

OD  Od. 

I    BAHAL  Bahal. 

'   NIISO  Niifi. 

S  SALMAN 


334       ^  ^^^^  Relation  of  !>,  Dee  his  JBions  mhfpirits^dnc. 


S'ALMAN  Salman. 

kotch, 
TELOC  teloch. 

CA5.ARMAN  Cafir  wah. 

HOLQ_  ^'^^* 


OD 


OL 


TI  ^^ 


u 


TA 


Ta. 


ZCHIS  Zodcbit. 

S  OBA  ^♦^«- 

C  O  R  M  F  G«rmf. 

I  G  A  H»' 

NllSA  Nil  fa. 

B  A  G  L  E  ^"i^'- 

A  B  R  A  M  G  ^*  r'^g-   g>  »»»  «^  '^g- 

N«>tff. 

N  •  N  C  P  ^»«^/- 

...  Curtain  is  drawn.      .  .  The  end  of  this. 

Ihis  it  the  feventh.\ 

E.K.  Now  is  the  Curtain  pull'd  away:  and  quickly  pull'd  again. 
Now  it  is  open  again.  He  is  apparelled,  of  colour  between  a  blew, 
and  a  red  mingled  ■■,  but  blew  fecmeth  to  be  the  ground.  From  the 
fhoulder  on  the  arms,  is  a  trunk  of  feven  pendant  labels,  with  laces.  On 
his  head  a  very  broad  Hat,  between  dun  and  black  colour.  His  apparel 
is  very  long. 

N  O  N  C I  NoTi  ci,      fu 

D  S  O  N  F  TifoHf, 

BABAGE  •        Bdhasf. 

OD  Od. 

C  H  1  S  CbU. 

OB  .Ob. 

HUB  AID  Hubiii. 

TIBIBP  Tibibf. 

ALLAR  ^^I'tr. 

A  T  R  A  A  H  Atraab. 

OD  Od. 
EF  Ef. 


J  true  'J(eUuon  of  D'.  Dee  his  ABions  with  fpifits,  &c. 

D  R  I  X  Tirix. 

FAFE  N  Fa  fen. 

MIAN  Mi  an. 

A.R  Ar. 

E  N  A  Y  £  tiay. 

0  V  O  F  Ovef. 
S  O  B  A  So  btt. 
DOO  AI  N  2?»  Sain. 
AAI            •  Aai. 

1  V  O  N  P  H  I  vonph. 
SOB  A  Soha. 

V  P  A  A  H  Vft  ah. 
C  H  1  S  Chis. 
NANBA  Nanba. 
ZIXLAY  ZixUy. 

D  O  D  S  I H  Vodfi/f, 

ODBRINT  Odhrint. 

T  A  X  S  taxs. 

He  maketh  Curfie. 

H Hubaro.  . 

T  A  S  T.  .  7aftax. 

Y  L . .  rifi. 
......  Do  a  lim, 

Eolit. 

01  log. 

' Orsba. 

DSC  HIS  Dschit. 

AfFA  Affa. 

MICMA  Micna. 

ISRO  /sre. 

MAD  Mad, 

S  2  OD 


ni 


i^&      A  true %elaHm  of  D^  Dee^/x  jBmsmthfpirUs^d^c. 


OD  ^^• 

LONSHITOX  LoHjhit8x, 

DS  '^• 

JUMD.  Jumbd. 

LUSDAN  Lufdan. 

E  M  O  D  E  Mwi. 

DSOM  dfom, 

OD  •  Od. 

T  L  I  O  B  Tli  oh. 

D  R  I  L  P  A  Drilpa, 

G  E  H  jeh. 

Gth. 

YlS  «3^'^- 

MADZILODARP  Mad  zi  fo  darf^ 

,  T'i-zt  iV  ti&f  Twelfth. 

ILS. 

................  Di  alfcrt. 

Za  car* 

c ,..  Co  bus, 

.....,.,.. Zamran. 

...i..l..  O  dt. 

...ICLE  CICLE, 

QJVA  §jg. 

That  is  a  call. 

A.  This  is  the  eighth 
NAPE  A  I  Na^eiti, 

BAB  A  GEN  jen. 

B  ha  gen 

DSBRIN  Vihrin.. 

OOAONA  V  X. 

0  0  Jo  Ha. 

LKING  LRINC. 

V  O  N  P  H  f^oHj>h. 


'-^■A 

■^ 


Jt — 


rjijftrue T^eUtio nofG' ,  D .*i  hif  Jciions mth  fpirits,  ^c»       1 3 7 


S  O  B  A  I  A  D  Sd  hai  ad. 

IVONPOV^NPH  Ivjnpovft^b. 

AL,ON  AUo». 

D  A  X  I  L  Dax  il, 

OD  Od. 

TOATAR  t-utt  tar. 

E.K.  The  Curtain  is  pluck't  to. 

A  voyce.   That  it  the  thirteenth, 

E.  K.  Now  it  is  open  again. 

E.  K.  He  is  now  as  if  he  had  a  pall,  or  Robe  of  Gold  with  a  ftrangp 
Cap  of  Gold  on  his  head. 

...  lis, 

cJWi  ca  0I  zed. 

.L.IRT  01  pin, 

1  A  L  P  R  G  Tal. 

I  alpurg. 

ELIOR5  Blms. 

D  S                                                              -  Z>^. 

0  D  O  Odo. 
BUSDIR  Buf  dir. 

01  AD  Oiad. 

OVOARS  Ovoars. 

C  A  OS  GO  CI  of  go. 

CASARMG.  Ca  far  pig. 

LA...  La  i  ad. 

E  R  A  N  E  ran, 

* .  I  N  T  S  Brints. 

CAFAFAM  Cafafam^ 

DS  Ds. 

;1VMD  lumd. 

-A  QJL  O  quu. 

A  q  lo, 

AD  OH  I  A  do  hi. 

OZMOZ  iJ/p». 

'^        >  OD 


i}8       tA  true  Relation  of  I>,  Dee  hi$  Anions  mth  fpirits,  6cc. 


O  D  OcU 

M  A  O  F  F  A  S  Ma  if  fa,: 

B  O  L  P  Bolp. 

C  O  M  O  B  '•  I  O  R  T  CiMobU  ort, 

PA  MET  Famht. 

Curtain  is  now  pluckt  to. 

A  voice  . that  is  all. 

Blejfed  he  'ke  Creator  of  all,  who  hath  wercy  en  all. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  here,  apparellf  d  as  he  was  wont  to  appear. 

ProroiTe   of  Nal Ihm,  hath  the  Lord  kfpt  prom/fe  with  you  :    and  wilhvjt   forget  rhe  leall   part  of 

CodcMiiirmcJ    his  whole  promife  with  you.  Keep  you  therefore  promife  with  the  Lord  ■■,  for^,  he  ii  ]ealoui,   end 

annv.  .^^f  xo  be  defiled.      Proceed  as  yon  now  do.      The  next  Monday  y  ni  jhall  htve,  x  many. 

^^^^Jl*^*"         ^-  VV^ill  it  pleafe  you  to  deliver  us  the  Ens^lifh  of  tliefe   14  now,   as  you  were  woiw 
CEived  the  ,     ^  *■  ■"  3  T  ^  / 

McEdayncxr.    to  do  ? 

Nal The  Engltlh  »///  have  a  day  by  it  felf. 

Nal The  [  A.[j  Third  Monday  to  come,you  Jhall  have  themall.     S«  that,you  have  but  three 

dayes  to  labour. 

6«  Yo*s  fpeak  of  the  next  Monday,  and  the  third  ;  and  fpeak  nothing  of  thefecond  Mon- 
day :  and  you  faid,  that  the  Engli/h  wili  have  a  day  by  it  felf:  And  you  fiiy  we  havcinuf 
three  dayes  to  labour,  &c. 

Nal H^hat  I  have  faid,  k  fo.     Go  alfo,  and  refrejh your  felves, 

[  E.  K.  The  Curtain  is  drawn.  J 

A  voice Stay  there.  , 

A  voice Give  God  thankj,  and  ma){e  an  end' 

E.  K.  Prayed  the  145.  and  146.  Pfahii  kneeling  reverently  ,  and 
I  likewife  in  heart  confenting  thereto,  attentively  liflning. 

Note  E.  K.   is  very  well  perfwaded  of  thefe  Actions   now, 

thanked  be  the  Highcft,  who  is  Almighty. 

Ci..  Laudate  Dominumde  Caflis,  laudate  eum  in  excelfis  :  laudate  eum  oinne<;  Angeli 
C)us,  laudate  eumomnes  virtutes  ejus.  Quia  ipfe  dixit,  &  fafta  funt  nobi«.  Non  fecit 
taliter  omni  nationi.        Soli  Deo  noflro,  !aus  omniSjViftoria,  Triumphus,8c  Jubilatio, 


Monday  Cracovi^  Maii,  21.   1564.  Mane^  hora  5.     Adio  Tertia,  Lunarit. 

E.  K.  There  appeareth  neither  Vail,  nor  any  thing  eKe  in  the 
Stone. 

A.  At  length  appeared  one,  but  none  of  them  :  he  is  jolly  and  green,  with  a  long  (  like 
green  Velvef  )  Robe  :  his  hair  long,  like  yellow  Gold  .•  nothing  on  his  head  but  his  hair, 
Heftandeth  as  tlwiigh  he  flood  in  a  cloud,  above  the  ufua!  paviment  in  the  air. 

re  Lo  the  Sunjhineth,  and  men  fear  no  ram,  the  clouds  are  dfperfed,   and  they  loo\  net  for 

atevipejl:  Butwhen  it  ruintthmigh'ily,  or  the  heavens  frown,  then  k^ep   they  their  howfes,  faying, 

one  to  another,  JFhat  unreafonable  Tempejt  is  this  ?     what    Hail-jicnes   are  thefe  ?     Good  LorLt 

•who  ever  faw  fuch  windes  ?    were  there  ever  fuchwindes  f"     So  jhall  it  be  of  the  power    of  God, 

V.  which  koldeth 'n  kif  hands  the  winde<,  and  frattereth  cloudes   abroad  with  hi^  feet:    For  -ef  hii 

co.mng^fhall  it  be  faid  amonglryotf.  My  Spiftt  hatli  vexed  me,  and  I  am  troubled :    ffhy  hajl  thoa 

brought  in  things,  greater  than  thy  felf  ?  or  where  flmll  this  power  dwell  that  overlhadoweth  me  ? 

per^     Wantingyou  fhall  defire,  (  asyoudo  )  and  being  filled  you  fhall  think  you  have  too  much. 

foroiao"  Flejh  can  never  be  throughly  wortified  but  with  death.     Thinks  not,  that  the  Lord  u  m  the  Snn^ 

^  .tne'ancth  j^^j  hjepeth  hit  continual  watch  through  the  heavens  5  which  becaufe  he  k  made  for  a.  time,   is  alfo 

d«reir.i^«tth  tied  to  time. 

alwifions'.  -f^^  that fitteth  and  judgethy  kfepeth  no  coiirfe  ;   but  a  continual  performance  of  I  is  k>ng-be- 

.fjithful     fore  providence  :     For  he  that  nfethhim  othermit,  Jhall  be  rejelled  :  becavfe  his[A.  ]  dwillitigi 
..  fay         arenot  in  the  manfions  of  the  faithful.      Lift  vp  your  ears  therefore  ;  for  t  but  faith  thehizheji: 

■  -  '^-        :  ..  ^  fibf 


God  Is   not 
tjedro  time. 


J  true  "Relation  cf  D'.  Dee  his  Mions  mth  fpirhs,  dec.      i  y^ 


Who  niadetheheavens, or  fpreadtheyn  itk.e  a  garment  ?  Who  breathed  into  mattythe  fpirit  of  un- 
derfiaHding  ?  Who  overthrew  the  proud  world  with  waters  ?  Who  fmiled  at  the  ruin  of  Pha- 
raoh ?  Who  rooted  the  wicked  out  of  their  feates  ?  and  made  them  become  vineyard:  for  my  peo- 
ple :  jet  the  '.iiff-itfckjd  generation  ?  H^ho  threw  down  the  'towers  of  Babylon,  and  the  great  Har- 
lot ?  Who  dwelt  upon  the  Earth,  and  became  flefh,  to  pay  for  your  wic!{ednejfe  ?  ^Vht  tumbled 
the  ihne  from  the  Well,  that  the  Sheep  might  drtnk^  ?  Even  he  it  if, that  gave  allthefe  their  times. 
He  it  it,  that  ;V  a<  able  to  mal{e  jou  underjiand,  as  thofe,  that  caji  into  the  -waters,  and  faid.  Let 
lis  draw  iipour  tilhj:  w^/cA  alwayes  deal  ech  with  the  weakell;  To  the  intent  he  might  prove 
himfelfthejhongeli. 

[  E.  K.  He  fpcaketh  a  great  deal  of  fpeech  as  to  himfelf,  which  I 
perceive  not.  J 

Even  he  it  is,  thatwill  make  you  ftrongand  wife,    If  he  findyou  with  garments,  V.jle  nupt'mli 

Ue  it  h,  that  faith  unto  joh,  Waver  not.   Be  jiedfajh,    for  the  faithful  are  never  ttnre~  opus  efi. 
warded. 

\_E.  K.  Hcputtethhis  right  handout  of  the  Stone,  being  grafped 
together.  Now  he  openeth  his  hand,  and  it  is  written  in  ■-,  and  it  is 
{o  far  from  me,  that  I  cannot  read  it  :  yet  he  feemeth  to  be  nearer  to 
ine,  very  much  more  than  his  hand.  The  writing  feemeth  to  be  like 
the  leaf  of  a  Book.      Thus  it  was  written. 

Have  an  eye  to  my  foretelling  ....  Troubles,     Sudden  forrow  is  at  hand,  in  all  the  earth. 

No,  hit  Ship  is  almoii  built.     Laskic,  if  htferve  me,  (hall  be  King  of  Poland .     If  he  ferve  ano-   '  •  ^• 
tber,  hit  bowels Jhall  fallout,  before  him  with  poifon.  Pcifon. 

E.  K.  Now  he  clafped  his  hand  together  ,  and  ftayed  the 
reading. 

A.  Whom  hLaskJe  to  ferve  (  O  Lord  )  but  thee  ?  to  keep  thy  Laws  ,  Statutes  and 
Commandemcncs  ?    not  to  depend  upon  any  creature. 

The  King  and  Chancelor  have  fold  the  people  of  this  Land,  and  arefworn  Turkj.       Re-     ^urts. 

twM  KOt  home  f  0  Lasko  (  Laskie  )  for  J «/"  r/.;o«  ^0,  tkot*  jhalt  offend  me.     Go  to  the  Emperour  ; -^^^  f^g  i^,k^ 
for  Iwill comfort  thee  with  hii  favour.    Let  him  not  return  thence,  tiil he  be  warned  by  lac.  A.  L. 

£k.  You  mean,  fropi  the  Emperours  Court  ?  Ad  Imptrato- 

L.  I  befecch  you,  by  what  token,  lliall  he  receive  your  warning  ?  ''""  "<»'/«"». 

;....,  Be  thou  hisrighthand,  to  his  body,  and  his  mouth  to  me.    I   will  be  merciful  unto^^^^^  by 
him,  and  hold  up  his  head.        Leave  off,  till  the  feventh  hour   of  the  daj  ;  thea  cometh  the  Ytiiainz. 
ACtion. 

A.  Mean  you  the  feventh  hour,  as  from  midnight  laft  ? 

A.  That  beginneth  ac  noon,  if  you  make  but  i»  hours  in  the  day:  or  at  iiifyou 
reckon  common  hours. 

Ike  feventh  from  theHorifon  :    Run,  that  rm  can. 

E.  K.  He  himfelf  runneth  away. 

A.   All  Glory  and  Praife  be  to  God,       Amen. 


Eadem  die  lunt,  hora  7  (  inrhoante  )  in  meridie.      Hora  planetaria. 

E.  K.  After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  (almoft)  appeared  our  Inftru- 
fl:ors, as  of . .  etime. 

A.   Gloria  patri  &  filio  &  Spiritui  Sanfto,  ficut  erat  in  principio  &  nunc  8c  in  fempi- 
tfrnafc/rula  feculorum.        Amen, 
.Gab i^love,mne,  move  not,  for  the  place  if  holy.     Be  patient  a  little  while. 

E.  K.  Nal'vaae  prayeth  all  the  while. 

-•£.  K.  G<«^rie/ rifeth  out  of  his  Chair  again,  and  warneth  as  before 
(thrice  )  that  we  Ihould  not  move,  for  the  place  is  holy.  Nal<vage 
piaketh  a  croiTe  toward  the  4  quarters  of  the  World,  with  his  rod,  as 
"e  was  wont. 

Nal There  are  ^oCalls  yet  to  come.        Thofe  30   are  the   Cal's   of  Ni ,  .  Princes  and^i  Pi'mces. 

W'risual  G  •vermurs,i*nto  whom  the  Earth  is  delivered^  «  portion.     Thefe  bring  in  and  again 
ifp . .  Kings  and  all  the  Governments  upon  the  Earth,  and  vary  the  Natures  of  things  :   whb^^'"' 


140        A  true  Relation  ofD^ .  Dee  his  M'ions  n^ith  /pints,  dc c. 


Pr'.ncfs     the  variatiiH  of  every  mo>'teHt  ■■,   Vntowhom,  the  pr&videiice  of  the  eternal  Judgement,  is  al- 


They 


K 


'-'''^P- ready  opened'.  Ihefe  are  generaWy  ,e,overned  by  the  twelve  Angles  «/"  t/E^c  iiTnles:  which 
Angel'-  ^^^  a  If 0  governed  by  they  '.vhich  \iaiid  before  the  prefence  of  God.  Let  him  that  ran  fee  loek^ 
Good' Argeh  hf  :  and  let  him  that  can  here,  attend  5  for  this  is  wifdom.  They  are  all  fpirits  of  the  Air  ; 
of  the  A'v,  or  not  rejeftcd,  but  dignified  ;  and  they  dwell  and  have  their  habitation  in  the  air  diver fij,  and  m 
Sfitki  dign'i- riffdyy  tlaces  :  for  their  wanfions  are  not  alik^^  neither  are  their  powers  equal,  Vndtrliand 
^'^'^'  therefore,  that  from  the  fire  to  the  earth,  there  are  30  places  or  abidings :    one  above  and  be- 

"  neatli  another  ;   therein  tbtfe  aforefaid  Creatures  haiv  their  al?oad,for  a  time. 


From  (be  elc 
ttienc  of  the 
fire   to  the 
catth. 

Note. 
For  a  cioie. 


Njmf. 


or 

th 
.  e. 


Pt  tota  terra  diftributa  Tub  12.  Priiicipibus  Angelis,  12.  Tribuum  Ifrael  :  quorum  12. 
aliqui  plures,  aliqui  pauciores  partes  habent  fub  fuo  regimine  ex  91  partibus  ni  quas  coca 
terra  hie  dtmonftratur  effe  divifa. 

ApocalypH  JohannisTeftimonium,  de  12  Angelis  12  Tribuuni;,  Cap.  21. 

Qwando  dividebat  Altilfimus  gentes,  quando  feparabat  fiUos  Adam,  conftituit  terminos 
populorum,  juxta  numeruni  filiorum  Ifrael ;   Hoc  igitur  hinc  cgregiepatere. 

They  bear  no  name. 

[  E.  K.  What  is  without  a  name  ?  ] 

,  7'heiror'lerlj place:     But  w  . .  they  have,  in  refpeU  of  their  being.     Vnderfland  them 

therefore,  by  the  fill},  (eccnd,  ih\rd  ..  fotthirtieth  Air.  ...  are  fo  to  be  nominated,  Otheu 
tte  Twentieth  air,  0  thou  fixteenth  Air,  &c.  .  .  .  fontetime,  (yea  all  together)  two  or  three, 
of  the  . .  elfe  govern,  by  time?,  which  are  the  Kings  unto  thefe  .  .  .  e  to  be  fpokfn  of  J  and  beare 
rule  together,  and  At  one  tiwe  in  the  divifons. 

In  the  firft  Air, the  ninth  ^eleventh,  and  feventh  Angel  of  f^<-  Tribes,  bear  rule  and  govern. 
Vnto  the  ninth  ,  7000.  and  200.  and  9  minijlering  Angels  arefuhjeQ,  Vnte  the  eleventh  2000, 
3C0,  60.      Vnto  the  feventh  5C00,  300,  60,  2- 

Nal Coi'nt  the  number 

A.  The  whole  fum  of  this  Government  amcunteth  to  1493 1. 

Na\ If  if  right. 

2.  thefecond  is  divided  into  3  parts,  the  A'tfi^lof  the  fourth  Tribe  hath  the  firfl  ;  tlie  Angel  of 
thefecond,  the  feccnd ;  The  Angel  of  the  fecond  the  third.  The  fourth  hath  thefe  many  3000,  6co, 
30,  6.  The  firji  fecond  of  the  fecond  2000.  .  •  o.  60.2.  The  laji  of  the  fecond  ...  00^  ^00, 
^c,    2.      Aide  thtfe  together. 

A.   They  arc 6660. 

3.  The  third.  Ihe  fini,  The  ninth.  The  fecond,  the  fcventh.  The  third  the  tenth.  The 
ninth 4400.      The  feventh  or  the  fecond 3660.         The  tenth  or  the  third 9236. 

Nal Nun'btr  them  ...... 

A.  They arc.in all 17296. 

4.  Nal 7he  faurthhJth  alfohit  three  parts.     The  An^el  of  the  tenthTribe  h^thtbe  jirjl^ 

The  tenth  hath  alfo  thefecond.      The  twelfth  hath  the  third. 


E.   K.   He  prayeth. 

The  firii  tenth 2560. 

tiumber  the  fourth  alfo. 
They  are  < 


Second  tenth  % 3060.      Twelfth  or    the    third 


11660. 

it  alfo  three  ford.  The  firfi  of  the  Tribes  have  the  firfi  .  .  enth  hath  the  fecond. 
venth  hath  the  third.  Ihe  firjt  hath  under  him  8630.  The  ftventh  or  fecond  . 
The  eleventh,     Ihe  thirds  5000,  Soo,  two.     Number  them. 

A.  They  are ^16738. 


..  6300. 

The  ele- 
,.   2306. 


E.  K.  He  prayeth  reverently. 

Be  patient  for  a  while.   Thefe  govern    in  the  fixth. 


A.  If  I  undcifland  yon  right,  thefe. 


6.  Thefe  govern  in  the  fixth  place  (which  is  to  lome')  The  Angel  of  the  fifth  tribe,  hath  the  firii 

pert,  (^for  there  are ,...)  T-he  Angell  of  the  twelfth  hath  the  fecond.  The  Angel    of  the  fifth 

hath  the  third p^rt.  The  Angell  of  the  firji,  that  is  to  fay ,  of  the  firft  fifth  ,  hathfubjfds,  30CO, 
6cOy2C,  of  }be  fecond  or  twelfth,  ^co,2CO,  of  the  third  place  and  fecond  fifth  7000,  200,20, 
2he  fifth  governs  m  this  order  twicet  therefore  it  is  termed  the  fecond  fifth.    Numltr  it. 

A.  They  are- 20040. 

7.  The  feventh  hath  alfo  \hree  places.  The  fourth  hath  the  firfl.  Ihe  third  hath  the  feccnd.  Ihe 
eltvcnthhatb  the  third.  The  fourth  and  the  firji  place— looo,^oo.  60,  ■^.  The  third  Angell  and 
fecond  placet  7000,  700,  6-    Ike   ehventh    Angell  the  third  place y  6000,300,20.  Number  it. 

A,  Thtyaie    20389.   /o, it  is  the  ftventh. 

8.  Ihe  eight  Ajre  ,  h.th  alfo  threep>^rts.  Ihe  Angel  of  the  fifth  hath  the  firfl.  The  Angel  of 
the  firfl  hath  the  fecond-  Ihe  Angel  of  the  ninth  hath  the  third.  Ihe  fijth  Aigel and  firfl  place  4000, 
300,60,2.  She  firji  Angel  and  feccnd  place  7CCOJ  200,5056.  lie  ninth  Angel  and  the  third 
place  J   200,300,2.  Numler  it.  ^ 

'  A.  Thcjr 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  J&ions  with  fpirits,  dcc^       14 1 


A.  They  are 13900. 

9.  Ihefiiftthisalfooftbrefplares.  The  third  Angel  huth  the  fir ji  place,  the  tenth  An^el  hath 
the  feco»d.  The  ninth  Angel  hath  the  third,  the  third  Angel  hath  in  tie  fir  It  place  9  '00,900,90,  6. 
Jhe  tenth  Angel  and  the  fecond place  3000,600,20.  Tlie  ninth  Angel  and  the  third  place,  4  ooq, 
200,  30.    Number  them. 

A.  They  are -17846. 

10.  'The  tenth  bath  places  alfo  three.  The  eleventh  Angell  ecrupieth  the  firlh  The  feve^tth  An- 
gel occnfieth  the  fecond.  The  ninth  Angel occupieth  the  third.  The  eleventh  Angel  andfirll  hath 
8000,  SoOjSo.  The  feventhAngelin  the  fecond,  1000,200,  30.  The  ninth  in  the  third,  1000,600 
10,  7.     Number  thent. 

A.  They  are 11727*  , 

^slahage  prayeth. 

Gabriel Ta\eheedyou  wove  not. 

11.  The  eleventh,  ii  three  as  hefore.  The  fir fi  is  occupied  by  the  tenth.  The  ferond  ly  the 
fxth.  T^ke  third  by  the  third.  In  the  firfl  place.  3000,  400,  70,  2.  In  the  feccnd  place^ 
7000,  200,  30, 6.       In  the  third  place,  5000,  200,  30, 4.     Number   them. 

.  .  - — They  are  15942. 

u.  The  twelfth  hath  alfo  his  dividons.  Three  firll  places  it  of  the  fxth.  Second  place  of  the 
eighth.  Third  of  the  fecond.  The  firjl  hath  2000,  600, -^o,  S.  The  fcond,yooOj  700,70,  2. 
The   third  3000,  300  90,1.       Number  it. 

, They  are  13821. 

13.  Ihe  thirteenth  hath  three.  The  tenth  is  in  the  fir  j}.  The  firfl  ii  in  the  fecond.  The  feventh  it 
in  the  third.  The  fir fi  hath  8000,  100,  10,  i.  The  fecond  30Q0,  300,  60.  The  feventh 
Angel  in  the  third  4000,   200,  lo,  3. 

Number  it, 
t^.  They  are  15684. 

14.  The  fourteenth  hath  threefold  place  as  the  refl.  The  fift  Angel  occvpteth  the  firji  ,  The 
feventh  occupieth  the  fecond ,  The  twelfth  tccupieth  the  third.  The  firji  vhich  is  the  fifth  Angel^ 
2000,600,70,3.     The  fecond  hath  9000  ,  200,30,6.     The  twelfth  ^00,  200,  3-0.    Number  it, 

A^  They  arc 20139. 

I)Jal.  Have  patience. 

t(.  K.  Now  he  ftandeth  on  the  top  of  the  Table. 

htarKdiligently. 

OCCODON  Occodon. 

Anfwereth  to  the  Angell  of  the  ninth,  iffihich  is  of  the  firfi^  ivkich  occupieth  the  firji  place  of  the 
firfi  Ayre.  It  is  the  name-  of  that  part  of  the  earth  which  is  governed  by  the  Angel  of  the  ninth 
Tribe ,  and  thofe  that  are  under  him  in  the  firji  divifitn.     The  firji  A/re. 

Mtrl{,  diligently. 


Pax  ci>my. 


Anfwereth  the  eleventh  Angel,  and  is  thmtpart  of  the  Earth  which  is  governed  by  him  and  his 
Minijiers,  in  the  fecond  flace  ef  the  firji  Ayre- 
Mark, 

VALGARS  Falgars. 

Jt  anfwereth  to  the  feventh  Angel  and  to  his  Minijiers,  5562,  w^icA  are  the  Ijfi  part  of  the 
firji  Ayre* 

Mtirl^  diligently. 
DOAGNIS  t>oggHis. 

It  is  the  firfi  part  of  thefecond,  the  firfi  part  of  the  earth  ,  which  is.  governed  in  the  firfi 
» jp/irr  of  the  fecond,  as  itjhall  after  nffear,  under  the  fourth  Angel. 
Mark,  diligently. 

PACASNA  fa  cafna,  dcrftand  this 

well,  how  one 
It  if  the  name  of  that  part  of  the  world  on  earth,  that  is  governed  in  the  fecond  part  of  the  IVj^^cAf^l"' 
fecond  Ayre  ,BY    THE    ANGEL    of  the  fecond  Tribe,  with  his  Mhvfiers.  2362.        An,°u 

T  Thhf 


114      A  true  Relation  of  D^  'Dtth'ts  JBionsmthJpiritSydac. 


Ibus  joujhall  underftand  of  all  the  na mes  tha t  fellow. 
D..AL..VA  Dial'tva. 

the  third  of  the  fecond  :  whofe  g'^ver»o»r  is  the mns  ofthiTriht. 

the  third  Ajre  in  the  firft  place. 

S  A  MA  PH.  Samapha. 

« 

Samatha  hath  over  it  of  the  tribe  the  ninth, 
the  fecond  of  the  third  is. 

VIROCHI.  „.    ,^/- 

Vi  ro  chi. 

Vnder    the  feventh  of  the  Tribe, 
the  third  place  of  the  7hird  Ajre. 

ANDISPl  Andispi. 

It  is  governed  by  the  tenth  of  the   tribe* 
the  fourth  Ajre  ,  the  firji  fart. 

THOTANF  thotanf. 

His  Govermnr  is  the  tenth  of  the  trihe^  fphofe  Minrjhers  are   2360. 
the  fecond  of  the  fourth. 

AXZIARG  Axziarg. 

It  a  governed  hy  the  tenth  of  the  tribe. 

P .  .  H  N  I R.  ^"^^  ""■• 

It  is  governed  hy  the  twelfth  of  the  tribe, 
the  fifth  Ayrej  thffirji  part. 
LAZDlXI  Lazdixi. 

Which  is  governed  by  the  firfl  of  the  tribe, 
the  ftcond  part  of  the  fifth. 
NOCAMAL  .  Nocimal. 

Which  is  governed  by  the  feventh  of  the  tribe. 
Jhelhird  of  the  Fifth. 

TIARPAX  .    tiirpAx. 

ffhich  IS  governed  by  the  eleventh  of  the.tr  ibe  ,   ffhofe  Mi»tfters  are  5  802. 

Be  patient  aifhile. 


ti 


J  true  delation  o^Y)'.  Dee  his  Anions  veith  fpirits,  Sec,        1 4  ^ 


Tbe  fixth. 

Cab Move  not Mofcs  was  to  feck  in  thcfc  fecrets, 

Nal The  firji  of  the  fixth  whofe  Govermur  it  tbe  fifth  of  the  Tribe, 

S   •  X  T  O  M  P  Sax  tomf. 

Tbefecend  ofthefxtb^  vhofe  Civernour  it  the  twelfth  tf  tbe  Iribe. 

VAVAAMP  ViVa.  amf, 

the  third  of  the  fixth^  which  is  governed  hj  the  fifth  of  the  Tribe. 
ZIR.ZIRD  ZirzirZ 

Whofe  Miniftei-s  arc  /Jao  as  before. 

The  fir  ft  of  the  feven  th  is  governed  hj  the  fourth  Trib  e> 

OBMACAS  Ohmtcas. 

K.  E.  Ever  the  Table  turneth  to  the  letter  under. 

The  fecond  of  the  feventh,  whofe  tbe  third  of 

gJ:NADOL  GenaJti, 

Tbe  third  «f  hji  the  eleventh* 

ASPI4ON.  JspiaoM. 

Tbefirftoftbe  eighthy  whofe  Govermur  it  the  fifth j  See,  whofe  Miniflers  are  4362.' 
ZAINFRES  Ziinfres, 

Tbe  fecond  of  the  ei^bthy  by  thefirfi  dfthe  Tribe,  wbofe  Miniftert  7236. 
'  TODNAON  Todnadn, 

Tbe  third  of  the  eighth  hj  tbe  ninth  of  toe  Tribiy  ad  under  him  2302. 

P  R.  I  S  T  A  G  TrU  tac. 

Tbe  ninth:  the  fir ft^  governed  by  tbe  tbirdj  wbofe  Minijliers,  ^pp6, 

dg* 
ODD  I  ORG  Oddiorg, 

The  fecond  of  tbe  ninth  by  tbe  tetitbi  whtfi  Miniftert  ^620. 

CRALPIR  Chi  fir. 

Move  net  for  tbe  Lord  it  great  amtngil  you, 
\e  la^  tf  tbe  ninth  by  the  ninth  cf  tbe  Tribe*  Mini(iers  43  30. 

DOANZIN  i)t*ftZin. 

T  i 


'Th* 


1^4       aJtrue'B^lation of  D'^Dct  his  Mions  mth/firits,6cc. 


BritaR. 


7he  firjl  of  the  tenth 
LEX ARPH 

7'be  fecond  of  the  tenth 
C  OMAN AN 

the  third  of  the  tenth 
T  A  B I  T  O  M 

Have  patience. 


Whtfe  Miniflen  are   161";. 


by  the  eleventh  of  the  trthe. 
Lex  arfb.     Xarph. 

Ijthefeventh. 
Co  mn  nan. 
ly  the  ninth. 
la  hi  torn. 

governed  by  the  tenth. 


molpand 

V  SN.RDA 
"the  third 

PONODOL 


T  AP  AMAL 

Ihe  fecond  of  the  twelfth 
GEDOONS 
the  third  of  the  twelfth 
AMBRI  OL 

"the  firjl  »f  the  thirteenth 

GEC AO  ND 

7he  fecond 


LAPARIN 

the  Ufi  of  the  thirteentb 
DOCEPAX 


"The  firft  tf  the  eleventh^ 

Minijiers  3472. 

« 

UMolfand. 
the  feccnd  governed  by  the  ftxth Minijiers  •J2^6. 

Vfnar  da. 

ly  the  thirds 

Minijiers  as  before  5  2  34- 

To  no  del* 

the  firji  tf  the  Pwelfth,  go  by  the  fixtb. 

ta  pa  mal. 

hy  the  eighth  Angel.  ' 

Ge  do  om, 

hy  the  fecond. 

Ambriel. 

gtverned  by  the  tenth. 

fitmilers  81 11.  • 

Ce  ca  and 

hy  the  firjl  of  the  tribes. 
•   •  La  pa  rin. 

hj  thefeventh  of  the  twelve* 


Is  luHa. 


the  firjl  of  the  fourteenth 
TEDOAND 


Do  ce  pax. 

hy  the  fifth  of  the  tribes., 
te  do  and. 


this  is  England  and  Scotland  roo,  called  anciently  by  the  name  of  Britanla.        there  UvetkH»\ 
A  man  that  knoweth  the  truth  of  the  Britilh  Originals. 

A.  The  Br/f//7^  Originals. 


the  fecond  of  the  14. 


lythe  feventh. 


VIVl 


J  true  Relation  of  ly.  Dee  his  JHiens  mth  fpirits,  (3cc,        145" 

V  I  V  I  P  O  S  Vivips, 

"the  laft  of  the  feurteentb  hy  the  twelfth. 

LMittiJlers  $2^0'. 

00. NAME  O  0  a  namb, 

E.  K.  Now  he  prayeth. 

E.K.    Now  Gabriel  ftandeth  up. 

Gab Ihe  Lord  pdr/oneth  jour  fajiitig  ,  and  acceptetb  the  inward  matt ,  labour  alfo  to  mor* 

roir.       ton  jhall  have  the  reji, 

A.  May  I  be  bold  to  ask  you  one  qucftion  ? 

Gab .Toumay. 

A,  Is  the  Queen  of  England^  alive,  or  dead  ? 

She  liveth. 

I  am  nothing  near  the  earth, 

B.  K.  The  Curtain  is  drawn.      We  prayed  joyntly  fome  prayers. 

b..  Upon  my  motion,  for  the  Lord  Al.  Laf.  how  to  deal  wii:h  the  Chancelour  ,  the  Curtain 
was  drawn  open.  And  he  in  the  green,  who  appeared  to  day,  came  into  the  ftone  ,  and  faid 
as  foUoweth. 

Thus  fayeth  the  Lord  :  Joyn  body  to  body,  but  let  m'mdes  ie  feparate  ,  for  he  ii  defpifed  in  the  -^^  ^^ 
fight  tf  God,  and  is  delivered  over  to  deftruftion ,  which  doth  tarry,  till  it  finde  him  ready.  _  ^j""  """^ 
Ifrael  deceived  Egypt,  and  faw  Egypt  overthrown.        Let  him  do  what  he  will  with  him  ,  but  Cracow. 
let  him  not  joyn  his  minde  with  him, 

A.  We  arc  dcfirous  to  know  your  name.  Mapfam» 

My  name  is  called  D\c\\\\s.  _  c'tiW 

J  am  ene  under  Gabriel  ,  and  A.  Jcfus  declared  his  name,  andfo  have    *  ""^  ' 

the  name  of  ]c£us  J  kjtow   and  other  good  Creatures  before  unto 

honour.  us. 

Map.  My  name  »  Mapfama.' 

A.   Is,  die  illis,  the  Etymology  thereof? 

Map.  It  if. 

A.  How  much  it  importcth  for  us  to  undcrftand  the  bed  counfcl  that  is  to  be  given  to  A.  L. 
yoQ  know,  &c. 

Map I  am  commanded,  and  I  have  done  my  commandment.     But  fee,  that  thou,  and  he  fid" 

fill  thofe  things  that  are  commanded  you  by  me. 

A.  You  faid  I  fliouldbe  his  mouth  to  you :  How  fhall  I  execute  that,  I  pray  you  ? 

Map Not  to  me,  but  to  God. 

A.  By  prayer  mean  you  ? 

Map.  .....  Tea,  and  by  frefence; 

A,  By  prefence,with  whom?  The  Empe- 

Map Thou  (halt  go  from  hence  with  him  to  the  Emperour  :  God  will  fllr  up  farther  rour.^ 

matter,  by  thy  prefence  there. 

A.  Shall  all  our  Leflbus  be  finifhed,  and /ufficient  power   delivered  unto  us  according  to 
the  promife  of  God  ? 

yeujhallbe al|le  to-praciiceby  Sunday, 

A.  By  which  iunday  ? 

Bvt  the  praftices  that  are  the  inftruftions  of  theHighcft,   are  not  but  in  lawful  caufes 

and  foir  neceilicy,  to  glorifie  God  ;  and  agaiiift  Pharaoh. 

A.   What  ftiall,  then,  be  the  hability  of  my  skill  to  praftice,  before  Sunday  next  ^ 

^        Map 7hefe  Calls  touch  all  the  parts  of  the  World.    IheWcrld  may  be  dealt  withall,  vifible 

tftih  her  parts  i  Therefore  you  may  do  any  thing.     Tbefe  Calls   are  the  l{eyes   into  the  (jates  and  hpp^rh'ion. 

Cities  of  wifdom.     Which  [^  Gates^  are  not  able  to  be  opened,  but  with  vilible  apparition*  Note. 

,        [  A.  Andhow  rtiallthat  becomeunto  ?  OMerve  per- 

Map If^hich  is  according  to  the  former  inftruftions  :   and  to  be  had,  by  calling  of  every  au  ^a"inhc 

Table,     loucalled  for  wifdom,  God  hath  opened  unto  you,   hit   Judgement:  He  hath  delivered  hySunf^y 
untoyou  the  k,eyes,  that  you  may  enter  ;  But  be    humble.      Enter  not  of  prefumption,   but  of  "-xt  praaife, 
pcrmiffion.    Go  not  in  rafhly  ;     But  be  brought  in  willingly  :    For,  many  have  afcended,  but  ^""^  '^*"*^ 
few  have  entred.     By  Sunday  you  fhall  have  all  things  that  are  necejfury  to  be  taught  3  then  (  as  ^'.j^^'^'^"?-** 

ecca- 


_  H^s       ^  i^^^ "Relation  ofD^,  Dec  his  Anions  nith /pints,  &c. 

'  occafionferveth  )  jou  may  praBke   at  all  times.      But  yoiTbeing  calUi  bj  God    a^iTtTu^d 

A.  How  fhall  we  imderlland  this  Calling  by  God  > 

Map Godjioppetb  r»y  ■mtnth^  I  will  aufwer  thee  no  more, 

A.  Mifericoidit  Dei  fit  fuper  nos^veritas  eju?  fulgeat  &  floreat  in  cordibus  noftris. 

Amen. 

kneele^d  b '  """^  ^''"^P^X"  devoutly,  and  I  joyning  my  mind  to  his  pronunciation  thereof 

1  his  pr,yer         T^omim  JefnChriiie,  Veiti  fabnarium  mfirorun,.     Cnjm  mmen  fit  benediaum  hodie  &  quotidie  - 
W.5  m-.fwrittcn  iimafcendtiu  fuper  Cxlim  €xlt,  ad  dextram  Dei  fatris :  demo  venturM  ad   iudicanduyH  ,- 

i,  ,bU  rUcc  «i'Um,  cum  potejhte  magna,  &  majejlate  mirabili,  educ  ms  vmCtos  tn  pec c at i^  in  fortitudZ 

£"''lJ:n  If.f  •?T>'^  '"^  •■  "^Z"/:^"''^*-?"'  remif^onempeccatorumfupr  nivcm,  adeo  HtbenefUcmm 

h^%c   oecn  jtt  tibihabitare  innobui  &  nos  in  te.     Amen.  ' 

:;Ma7foiLw-  ^-  Ex  Pfalterio  poil  67  Pfalnium. 

ing. 


TnefdayCncovxx^Oi'Uii^i.    1584.    inWhitfon-week,  Mane  circa  7 

w  ,  »w  Vh.  Q?'"'      r"?'  ^"^  ^°'"''  P''^^^'  "^^■^'    ^PP^^^'-d  a  very  iitde  Creature,  on  the  CuHiion, 

llluder.  by  the  S  one  .•  fay.ng,  P«r  out y.ur  Ca-.dle  ;  for  you  fiiail  have  nothing  rodo  to  day. 

hi^t.fr!  f ''  ^Ts  "■""'  ']""'  "^^  ""^  ^;ledgcyour  mellage  for  our  clcculc  ;  feeing  we  were 
bid  yelterday  to  labour  to  day.  ^ 

E.  /r.  He  IS  gone. 

A.  After  that  about  half  an  hour,  there  appeared  our  Inftruftors,  as  before  time 
^^°' Movsy  move,  mevenotjfor  the  place  is  ha'y. 

£,  K.  Gabriel  ftanderh  up,  and  after  a  while  faid. 

......Jheheavens  are  called  rit^hteow,   b,.  uufe  .^  their  obedience.     Tiie  earth  ace urttd  h. 

Obedience.      '""^  ?f  ^'^^  frowardndle.      Thcfe  rh.-refore,  that  feek  he.venly  thi.zs,  ought  to  he  obedient  ■  led 

Zin'f'  ^°^^'-^"f^' ^'-y  be  confume.]  in  the  end,  bumf  to  aftes  with  fire    Thiafh 
Jhall  be  for  her  unrighteoufnefe.  ^^^^i   '*  foe  £.arili 

is  ^!'iHfrjt7'"  °^'^"f  *  ""'^  f"^'  i  ^''"'^'"^  '  "-^«^  '^'  irrjirumnt  of  righteoufnejfe  ,  (^hicb 

Faith.         "f^'ll  }   f'^i  JOU  may  be  perta^ers  of  the  celelHal  comforts  -,  which   are  thf  hire  offuch  a,  for. 

fake  then-  frovvardnels.      It  hath  been  faid  nnto)  ou,... !  Meaf.re  not  cut  Cods  buulig      It  hatl 

bee;:  faidwtto  you, . ...  Continue  to  the  end.    It  hath  been  alfo  told  you,  ...  that   the  DeteLinZ 

tmts  of  God  are  not  as  ye:  cdabmcdupon  you.  J    >    .    ^aa,  we  uetermtm- 

•  \r^ie  I.  Rei.        f"*'''t  iiwntttr.  It  may,  again  be    *  iiiidetermined  7  fpeah  tbii  for  your  inliruSion  -     F.r 

c.f.  .   F  ,/.    ^-J*-.tne  power  ofGod,  but  not  unco  righteoufnefTe:.,^.*  eULrnong7thjew!Z 

Pfe-  ni,,  u-  *,ZCnJ  I     A       f  f  ^^''oy^^^'i  ^^e  not  grod.       Not,  that  thej  were  evil  in  the  timeof  their 
.; ..  /.:/e  et.a.,.  ^"^'"V  f'.  ^'"  ^''f'if'  ^''^f  In-unUion,  and  the  dignity  of  then  offA  ^r.  defiled  in  them  in  the  end 
V-rt.  ,.v,,.s.  through  rhe,ro..n  frowardnefTe.        rhe  High-pn.jh  alfo  were  chofrn  inrighteoufn.fe  ,   andbTtt 
S.R:S'^c.,r.z.ffiritofGod:  b,t  they  became  Rebels  in  the  holy  boufe  :  and  f^ich  J  ofwbo^  it  k  Li   AltiSLus 
«f    cnttrmt      autemfuir  franrli  iim  ;iKc        E^       r  ;        i  ■     i         ■  T      ■'   '^'•"'•"  "  "  jala.  3  /iltlllimUS 

Vo-Jus  fa.    '*""™;"''^  icanda  urn  lUis.     Ei^enfo  my  brethren  may  it  be  with  you. 

n,onisf,J,c^c       ^-  J^'"=^'i"'^"J  us  from  that  inconvenience. 

'      Fora.though,ithnthpleafedGod,toPewhimfelfuntoyou,yetareyonnctaJhanfedtoraj-   If 
the  harveit  cometh  not  in,  at  the  time  appointed,  I  will  become  a  runnagate  '^ 

But  Euge  C  "'J  brethren)  Hath  the  Lord  need  of  you  ?     It  needeth  not  be  told  you  ;  you  km-m 

For  what  ?      the  contrary.     Ihen  it  fcUcweth,you  have  need  of  God.     But  for   what  .^  .„d  why"    That  ,3 

fouls  may  overcome  thi,  World,  overcome  the  body,  to  the  dignity  of  an  Angel  '  "^'-^^"^ 

And  bccaufeyoH  are  miferahle,  and  turned  cut  to  the  field,  full  of  brambhs  and  mifcry.  hane 

,         nakfd,  and  unarmed    to  fight  againfi  him,  that  reftjietb  againjl  the  might  of  God.     CMerxM, 

lajt  two,  and  then  anfwer  jour  fives,  for  the  reji.  &      j  ^0   .     L^onjiaer  theje 

Ovc  IgiveyouaA-ortyvarning.     God  will  fulfil  hU  promises  :     And  (^  as  he  hath  faid  )  by  this  Att- 

PiomiilA  ret    gult,  youjhail  understand.  '        J  ^J  ••'"*  ntr- 

««>„«..«,.        I.  How  to  know  and  ufe  God  his  Creatures,  good  and  bad. 

"^'"T    '->'  !=■;    \  j"'T\^'':'''^^';'Z^''\'^/''-^^Z'^'<>f'^'H^f^^'ii^'^nd(hall^  y,m 

Tif&L        ^;:  tf^  ^^j""^  "'  '""'['^^  •-  CoHfider  it,  if  you  can  :    and  they  are   the  greatefiUecaufe  the, 
tb:  g,«tcft.    f '   '^^^  ^'"^>  '"^  ^«""">  all  That  hath  been  done  before  them.     Lrh  if  you  confiderwelL  aZ 

UwhatyoH  areralled  ;   yo.  p.U  percene,ihat  the  Judgements  of  God,  areiot  llnMaU 
Movcnotfion,      ^Jl'\rtV    I'f  "',^''7^'^«'«-^  ^^^ethren.      Have  a  little  patience  for  the  A^l.  ' 

pla.c  ^ e  f^^' Mr ftbfiom  his  p\^ejhall find  the  reward  of  it. 

A,  After 


^J^true  '/^elation  o  f  D^  Dtt  hi s  Acli^jns  mth  fpirits,  <?cc.        1 47 


6.   After  ha'f  an  hour  ?  The  twelfth  ha:h  the  third- 

Qah   ty.Uve  not.  Move  not.  Move  not. 

Three  Prrts  ^'"  f"^"""^  ^"'^  '*^  ^'"'^ 

T/y  r,hirb  hathth^  firf,  V'u  ^""-^ ti'^ I'^'J^^'i' 

:    llf  tenth  h^th  the  fecoud.  The  ninth  hath  the  third. 

'     2^'-  '-^''f'^  ''''  ''^"■^-  18 The  eighteenth  is  of  three. 

Th°  i^  hfith  q  parts.  i  ?                  C  the  fifth. 

The  fecondhJ^hthefirH,  2  V     hath      ■^the  feventh. 

The  third  bath  the  fecond,  3^                  ^  the  twelfth. 

£.  K.  He  threw  like  duft  out  of  the  Stone  toward  my  eyes. 

ip.  ......  T'he  ninteenth  if  alfo  threefold.  2 third. 

I Thetwelfth.  3 feventh, 

2 The  eighth. 

,.  The  eleventh.  21  ,The  one  and  twentieth,  zV  alfo  threefold. 


I twelfth. 


5  ... 

20  The  twentieth  is  alfo  threefold,  g  2 f/^^t^ 

1 ,.  fifth.  3 fixth 


E:  K.  There  ftandeth  one,  at  one  of  my  eares,  and  at  another,  an- a  tempting  iu 
othcr,  howling  like  Dogs  i  andfaid,  Ah  you  beggars  !  come^nKe. 

Gab He  will  deceive  yoU-,  takj  heed  lefi you  move. 

E.  K.  He  feemeth  to  be  telling  money  behinde  me. 

A.   Look  not  back  in  anj  cafe. 

The  ninth  of  the  fifteenth  hath  under  him  \j\.'\  of  the  ^  2.  1000.300.60,7.  A        ^'i'^. 

The  tenth  of  the  firti[^-~\  hath  under        1000.  500,  60;  7.  \_b..']  of  the  12.  Sup. 

The  twelfth  of  [a.]  the  ftrjl  1000,  800.  80.  6.  Terlar''''  ^'^ 

The  fir\i  of  the  fecond\_^.'^hath  under  him       9000.  900,  20.   and  he  it  the  fectnd  of  the   '"^^   ^' 
twelve. 

The  fecond  of  the  fecond,  which  is  the  third  of  the  12.        9000,200,30. 

The  third  of  the  third,  which  if,the  twelfth  of  thetwelfth,  hath  under  him  "j  000,  200,  /^q. 

Thefirfi  of  the  third  (  the  fecond  of  the  12  )  hath  under  him  jooo,  600,  20,  3. 

The  fee  and  of  the  third  ,  which  is  the  fir  ii  of  the  12.    7000,  100,  30.  2. 

The  third  of  the  third,  which  is  the  ninth  of  the  i  2.    hath  with  him  ,   or  under  him,  2000^ 
600,  30}  4. 

iS.  The  firfi  of  the  fourth,  which  is  the  fifth  of  the  12.     2000,300,4036. 

The  fecond,  which  is  the  feventh  of  the  1 2,   under  him  7000, 600,  So,  9. 

^he  third  of  the  fourth,  which  ii  the  twelfth  of  the  1 2.     under  him  9000,  200,  70,  6- 

The  firj}  of  the  fifth,  which  is  the  twelfth  of  the  1 1.  under  him,  6000,  200,  30,  6. 

The  fecond  which  is  the  eighth  of  the  1 2.   under  him,  6000.  700,  30,  2. 

The  third  of  the  fifth  :  which  is  the  eleventh  of  the  12,  under  him,  2000,  300,  So,  8. 

The  firji  of  the  fixth,  which  is  the  fifth  of  the  1 2.    under  him  3000,  600,  20,  6. 

The  fecond  of  the  fixth the  third  of  the  i  2.   7000,  600,  20,  9. 

Tke  third,  which  is  the  feventh  of  the  12.     under  him  3000,  600,  30,  4. 

21.   The  firJi  of  the  feventhywhicb  is  the  twelfth  of  the  12.   under  him 'yOOO,  •yOC,  30,6. 

2  he  fecond  of  the  feventh,  which  is  the  eighth  of  the  12.  under  him  5000,  600,  30,  5. 

The  laji  of  the  feventh,  which  it  the  fixth  of  the  1 2 .  under  hint  5  000,  6  00,  5  0,  8 . 

Number  every  Ayre.  Hove  patience  for  awhile. 

^'  ■— Tlie  15,  4520  I  •  is  the  twelfth  of  the  twelve. 

The  16. 28390  2  is  the  firji  of  the  twelfth. 

■_ -i,:  The  17 ij  s^  3 is  the  twelfth  of  the  twelve. 

'«"'"        The   18 19311 

The  19 


•»« 


-^  i5  3'^<5  23.     The  firli  of  the  fecond. 

The  20 14S89  '   I    J        ' 


^"^  \\>.J}^  '^^   '~ '°^'^  2- •  the  feventh  of  the  twe've. 

_l'..  ^  I  the  feventh  of  the  tvrelve. 

The  firji  of  the  fourth  feventh  hath  three  3  the  eighth  of  the  twelve, 

..  T'^rts. 


i4.  Thi 


^A  true  Relation  of  D'", 

Dec 

his  Mions  wh  j f  hits y  die. 

24,     "the  third. 

I the  fourth  of 

Tj.     The  fixth. 

2 —  the  tenth. 

5 the  twelfth  of  the  twelve. 

I  • the  fecend. 

25.     the  fourth. 

2  • •  the  fourth. 

I '  the  fourth. 

3 the  fifth. 

2 the  fecoKfl. 

5  _ — .  the  twelfth  of  the  twelve. 

28.     The  feventB. 

The  fifth. 

I  •  the  twelfth. 

I  — '-^  the  tenth'p- 

2  the  eighth. 

2  • ■  the  miith> of  the  twelve. 

3  — . — ■  twelfth  of  the  twelve. 

5  — thefix\}i  2x 

2  ->     The  firjl  of  the  firft,  whiah  it  the  twelfth  of  the  twelve,    under  him  2000.  200.  30.  2. 

The  fecondofthe  firji,  under  him  2000.  300.  20.  6. 

The  third  ef  the  firjr,  which  is  the  eltventhof        wider  him  2000.  300.  60.  7. 

. .  The  firjl  of  the  fecond,  which    7000.  30b.  20. 

The  fe'.'ond  under  him  7000.  200.  60.  2, 

The  third  of  the  fecond,  which  if  thefecond  ef  the  12.   under  vim  7000,  300.  30.  3. 

24  The  firji  of  the  third^  which  is  the  fourth  of  the  twelve^under  him  8oco.  200, 
Ihe  fecondof  the  third^which  n  the  tenth  of  the  twelve.^  under  him  8000.  300.  60. 
The  third  of  the  third,  which  it  the  eleventh  of  the  twelve^under  bint       bboo.200,  30.6. 

25  The  firjl  of  the  fourth^  which  ii  the  fourth  of  the  twelve,  under  him  5000.  6000.  30.  2. 
The  fecond  of  the  fourth,  which  is  the  fecondof  the  twelve,  6000.  300. 30.  3. 

The  third  of  the  fourth,  which  is  the  twelfth  of  the  twelve,  under  him  6000.  200.  30.  6. 

2  6      The  firfi  of  the  fifth,  the  which  it  the  twelfth  of  the  9000.  200.  30, 2. 
The  fecond  of  the  fifth,  which  is  the  eighth  of  the  twelve,  5000.  600.  20. 
The  third  of  the  fifth,which  is  the  fwelfth  of  the  twelve,  5000.600.  30.  7. 

27  Th?  firfi  of  the  fixth,  which  i$  the  fecond  of  the  twelve,  hath  under  him  7000.  200.  20. 
The  fe-cond  of  the  fxthithe  fourth  of  the  twelve,  7000,  500.  60. 

Tie  third,which  is  the  fifth  of  the  twelve,  7000.  200.  60.  3. 

28  The  firfi  of  the  feventh,  the  tenth  of  the  twelve,  2000.  600.  30. 

The  ferond  of  the  feventh,  which  is  the  ninth  of  the  triielve,  under  him  7000,  200,  30.  6. 
Thelafi  of  the  f event h,  the  fixth  of  the  twelve,  under  him  8000,  200, 

/^.    The  22*ii. ....  is....i    ^925.  * 

2} • 21915. 

24 24796. 

25 — — • '  18201. 

26 18489- 

27 22043. 

28 — ^18066. 

They 1  kneel  to  prayer.       Then  the  Curtain  was  drawn. 

E.  K.  There  appearcth  like  the  fnuf  of  a  Candle  on  the  top  of  the 
-fione,  it  is  like  a  little  fpark  of  fire.  After  this ,  Gabriel  faid  by  voyce, 
Have  patience. 

A.  Afc^r  half  ail  hour,  A  voyee  faid  ...  look  to  ....  to£,if.  - 

E.K.  The  Curtain  ib  drawn  open.    Nal<vage  ftandethonthe  top  oi 
the  Table.  '^ 

Nal The  fir fi\  fart  of  tht  firfi  [even  jtH  h*i  ttd^j. 

The  ninth. 

TAHANDO.  T*h4Hd0.  ,. 

TU 


» • ■ ^  '.   T 

Jtfue  Relation  cf  D'.  Dee  his  ABions  mth  [pints ,  dcc^      14.9* 


7hetentbj  the  feconi'-f  the  firjly  vhichisthe  tenth. 

N  b  C  1  A  B I  Nocisbi. 

Th:  third. 

T  A  S  T  O  X  O  Tasttxo. 

1  -5    Ihe  firli  of  the  feconi. 

CVCARPT  Cm  carft. 

Toe  fecoxd. 

LAVACON  Lava  con. 

•the  third  is  gsventfd  by  the  twelfth  of  the  twelfth.  Minijiers  9140. 


SOCHIAL 

17     T'he  third.  ~  the  firfi^  which  is  the  fecond  of 

SlGMORF 
the  fecond. 

aydropt 

7he  third ,  whofe  governaUr  is  the  ninth  of  the  twelve. 
TOCARZI 
i8     the  firfi  of  the  fourth. 
NABAO  MI 
the  fecond. 
ZAFASAI 
Hhe  third. 
YALPAMB 
the  firjl  of  the  fifth. 
TORZOXI 
tke  fecond. 
A  B  A  I O  N 
the  third. 
OMAGRAP 

29    thefirfioftheftxth. 
ZILDRON 


Ki 

So  fhi  al. 


Sig  morf. 
Aj  dro^t. 
tocdrai. 
Na  ha  0  mi. 
Zti  fa.  faii 

lalpa  M  B. 
tor  Zex  i. 
A  ha  i  od, 
0  md  graf. 

Zi  L  droit. 
V. 


the 


1^0 

A  true  elation  of  D^.  D^thhjBtons  mth  ffmts.^C 

^he  ffconi  of  the  fixtb. 
PARZI  •  A 

Par  zi  h». 

the  third  »f  the  fixtb. 
TOTOCAN 

To  to  can. 

The  firfi  of  tht  fcventh  bj  the  twelfth. 

CHIRSPA 

Ghirs  fa. 

rhefecondcftkefeveHth. 

TOANTOM 

To  in  torn. 

'the  third  cf  the  feventh. 

• 

VlXPALG 

Vg. 
CtWxt,  ViKfaig. 

^a\...,..'rbe  Uft  feve». 

Thefirji. 
OZIDAIA 

O'Zi'dai  0^ 

the  fecond  of  the  Ufi  feveK. 
PARAOAN 

Para  0  an. 

the  third. 

CALZlRG 

23     1'he  firji  of  the  fecend. 

Vg. 
Culzirg. 

- 

RO  NO AMB 

The  fectnd. 

Ko  no  amh. 

ONIZIMP 

0  m  Z'tnif, 

the  third  of  the  feteni. 

ZAXANIN 

Zax  a  ni». 

24    thefirfi. 

ORCAMIR. 

Or  ca  mir. 

Ihe 
CHIALP  S 

Ki. 

Chi  alp. 

Ihe  third  of  the  third. 

SO AGEEL 

So  i  ge  el. 

Ihe  firji  of  the  fourth. 

MIRZIND 

fJHir  zind. 

7he  fecond 
OBVAORS 

hj  the  fecond  of  the  twelfth. 

Ob  va  trs. 

* 

The  thirds. 

ranglam 

Toe  firji  of  the  fifth 
26    POP  HAND 

Kan  giant, 

by  the  twelfth  of  the  twelfth. 

Pi  fhand. 

<^y{true  Relation  ofD^,  Dee  kis  ABions  mth  fpiritSy  <?cc;       15 


iTte  fecond. 
■      N I  O  R  A  N  A  Nigrina. 

the  third. 

B  A  Z  C  H  I  M  B««  chim. 

Ibe  firfl, 
.      S  A  Z  I  A  M  I  Saaia  mi. 

The  fee  on*. 

MATHULA  '  MMthMla. 

The  third. 
ORPANIB  OrfuMih. 

28 the  firjl  of  the  feventh. 

LABNIXP  LahHimf, 

Thefectnd. 

F  O  C  •  S  K  I  Focis  tit. 

The  third. 
'   bXtdPAR  Oxlofar, 


Ifal Hdve  patience  ftr  «  Tfhile.       Sty  oh'. 

*«?.;;*l*;,v  l':^n;.*,rJ ./  *  r..  =•  l-  now  ^e  ftaade* 

The  fecend  the  fourth  of  the  3  ....  the  fifth  of  the  12.  oft  the  Table. 

50.  The  thirtieth hath  ^  parts, 

1  • the  twelfth.  "S 

2  -  the  fourth.     C     r  ^t      . 

3. tbeth^rd.      >'f'b^^^' 

^  ■■  thefixth.       J 

The  firfl  of  the  nine  and  twentieth  hath  under  him,     9<?32. 

.The  fecond by  the  fourth  of  the  12.      undfr  him  ^2^6, 

The  fifth  tf  the  12  that  geverneth  under     7635* 

I  ^o  Thetielfthefthe  li.        4632. 
The  fecond  ....  hy  thefturth  of  the  I2.       under  him  ^6^6. 
The  third  ....by  the  third  of  the       under  him  7^32. 
The  lafl  ....  by  thefixth       5632. 

,  0     The  earth  in  the  firfl  divifion  of  the  29. 

V  AS  TRIM  irastrtnt. 

-^e  fecond  fart  «f  If  Ayrei-, 

ODRAXTI  Odraxtt, 

hy  the  fifth  of  the  i2f 
The  third,  wbofe  Miniflers  are  7635. 

V2  COMZIAM 


H z      aJ  true %elation  of  I>^  Dee  his  ABions  vpithfpirits^  6cc. 


GOMZI.AM  (Somziam. 

30  ,  "Ihefirft  of  the  :^o,..,  under  tbt  li. 

TAOAGLA  TaSMgU. 

The  feconi  under  the  fourth  of 

GEMNIMB  Gemnmh. 

The  tfnri    under  the  third. 

ADVORPT  di  vorft. 

The  laji hy  the  fixth  $f  the  1 2.' 

'^J'.'none        DOZINAL  Vtzin^l. 

.  .  re  :  but 

*'    ^**  Hal 1  have  done. 

A.  As  you  gave  us  tafte,  or  warning  of  IttlU  and  BritanU,  fo  if  it  be  thought  good  c«|| 
you,  we  are  delirous  to  underftand  of  the  reft,  the  Application  to  fuch  names  as  we  under-' 
fland. 

Nal. ......  Makf  an  end  for  to  day:    Give  tver.     Makf  your  felves  ready  for  toimrrr9f\ 

^CttOH. 

E.  K.  The  Curtain  is  drawn. 

A,  Deo  omnipotenti,  Optimo,  &  snaximo  Univerfa  machina  creata  laudem  gloriam  &:  ho- 
norem  reddat ,  nunc  &  in  perpetuum.       Amen. 

A.  There  is  a  prayer  written  after  the  Aftion  of  Monday  Afrfii  21.  next  here  before  be- 
ginning Vomine  Jefu  ebrijitf  &c»  which  I  raifplaced  there ;  for  after  this  dayes  Aftion,  it  was 
faid  by  E.  iC.  and  me. 


LIBRI 


r"^ 


J  true  Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBtons  with  fpirits,  6c c.       i^  ? 


LIBRl  SEPTIMI   APERTORII    CRACOVIENSIS 
MYSTICI,    SABBATICI, 

Tars    Ouarta '^   Anno   15S4.    Mali   25; 


Wedenfdaj',  t  CracovUi  Mail  23.  Mancj  hora  J.  \  fere,  Poji  orationes  nojlras. 

He  Curtain  appeared,  at  the  firft  looking. 

L.  There  happened  a  great  ftorm  or  temptation  to  E.  K.  of  doubt- 
ing and  mifliking  our  Inftruftors  and  their  doings,  and  of  contem- 
ning and  condemning  any  thing  that  1  knew  or  could  do.  I  bare  all 
things  patiently  for  God  his  fake,  eJ"c.  At  length  the  Curtain  was 
opened,  and  they  appeared. 

E.  K.  I  am  contented  to  fee,  and  to  make  true  re- 
port of  what  they  vvill  fhew  j  but  my  heart  ftandeth 
againft  them. 

Gab "The  time  jljall come,  that  the oak^  that  is  beaten  with  every  florm  fio-Il be aBiniMg- 

"table  in  the  Princes  Hall.  .  able 

Gab M  ve  not,  for  the  place  iih'jly.  He  that  doulteth,    doth  the  property  oftheflep^  doubting  i 

hut  he  that  hath  faith,  hath  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghofi.  The  Swallow  flieth  [yfift,  but  where  fbe 
lighteth,  there  if  no  remembrance  of  her  being  :  fuch  are  the  words  of  man.  But  our  words  are 
like  unto  afwift  arrow,  that  entretb  and  lHc!{?th  where  it  lighteth. 

As  man  loveth  the  Ofvre  for  the  Gold  that  is  in  it,  and  for  the  end  of  his  ufe  ;  fo  G»d  loveth  the 
dunghills  of  the  ff^or/d,  &c.      But  the  enemy,the  more  he  lifteth  up  himfe/f,  the  greater  /hall  be  his  A.  I  Tiifpeft 
fall :   for  in'had  of  joy,  jhall  enter  in  an  hundred,  andinjiead  of  hundred  a.  thoufand.   But  beware  'J"?  "'*"  '» 
efthofe  Rebels  ;    for  they  are  like  the  f mall  jl ones  which  are  in  every  place  of  the  'Earth.       But    =""i'"f«'S. 
tnove  not.       Let  ui  do  that  which  is  our  part  :      Vnto  others  be  it  as  they  deferve. 

E.  K.  There  appeareth  a  great  thing  like  a  Globe,  turning  upon  GlobeappM''r- 
tvvoaxcll-trees.  ,  '"^" 

Nal T^rn  tothefirfiJir .A.  I  have  done. 

Nal.  Jbe  Earth  in  the  firfiayre,  is  this,  [E.K.po'mt'mg  on  that  Globe  to  it.  ] 

U.   We  befeech  you  to  bound  or  determine  the  Countries  or  Portions   of  the   Earth,  by 
their  iittermoft  Longitudes  and  Latitudes,  or  by  fonie  other  certain  manner. 

.    Nal Ofir  manner  is,  not  as  it  is  of  worldlings  :   IFe  determine  not  places  tfter  the  forms    •  •  w»rdes, 

cflegs ,  or  as  leaves  are :   neither  we  can  imagin  any  thing  after  the  fajhion  of  an  [  A  J  horn  :  as     '  •' ^ 
■  thpfe  that  are  Cofnographers  do.  ,      -  ,  ,  A^^ngd  ap- 

UotW'thjlanding  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Ptolomie,  and  opened  unto  him  the  prrts  peared  to  Fto- 
ofthe  Earth :  but  fome  he  was  commanded  to  fecret :   and  thofe  are  Niirthward  imder  your  Pole,  lumie, 
JSat  unto  yon,  the  very  true  names  of  the  ^orld  in  her  Creation  are  delivered. 

A.  There  appeared  a  great  water,  long  and  narrow,  reddifh,  and  thereby  appeared  .  .  . 

There  appeared  written  Egypt.       He  hath  in  his  hand  written  Syria..       And  of  that  he 
faid,  that  it  was  the  fecond  of  the  firft. 

Now  appeared  a  very  fine  Land  and  R.egion  in  which  appeared  a  great  City,  in  the  edge  of 
it.      There  appeared  written Mefopotamia.       The  third  of  the  firft. 

Now  appeared  alarge  portion  of  the  Earth,  wherein  appeared  Beares,  agreat  River  from  The  firft  of  th« 
a  Hill  going  into  the  Sea  with  three  mouths.         The  word  written  Cappadocia.  fecond. 

The  fecond  of  the  fecond. 

written  in  his  hand  T/z/r/^. 

A. I  pray  you,  do  you  mean  Tufcia  by  Italy  ? 

*tbe  third  of  the  fecond  :  vivitttn  Parva  Afta. 

"the  fir  it' '  Hircania  ■ ■  h.  Mare  Cafpiumzppezred  by  it. 

The  fecond ■  Thracia 

The  lali  Here  appear  people  going  into  Caves  of  the  ground,  and   dwelling  in  qoIj  Mines 

Caves  :   they  are  long  haired  men,  naked  ;    Here  appear  great  Hills,  and  the  veines  of  the  underthe  Pole 
Gold  Mines  appear  :   the  men  feem  to  have  baskets  of  leather.     This  is  one  of  the  places  un- ^^'^''t^. 
derthc  Pole  Artick,  written  ....   Gofmam. 

A.  . Is  it  fo  called,  of  the  peopleof  the  Country  > 


ras 
...ng 
. .  ■  any 
. .  Poles 
Divini- 
ationc. 


Nal Even  at  thishsur. 


E.  K.  Here 


1 54      y^  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBionsmthJjfirits,  &c, 

E.  K .   Here  appcareth  a  mighty  great  Hill,   and  about  it  a  great 

Cave  of  water.      Here  appear  bcafts  divers:   fome  like  a  Swine,  with 

feet  like  a  Beare,  his  neither    )aw  hanging  to  his  and  divers 

and  a  mighty  Hill  running,  with  branches :    there  by  lie  things 

with  huskes  on  them. 

Thefirjl. 

he  appointeth, 

written  The  b  a  idi. 

ihefecond  — —  Here  the  Sun  fhlncth  fair.  Parfadal. 
Toe  third  ~ —  Here  appear  people  very  beaftly,  with  Mantles  on  their 
fliouldcrs :  and  beafts  with  long  fnouts. 

India. 

Here  appear  great  rotten  trees,  very  old,  great  Woods  of  them. 
Beyond  the  Woods  are  great  Hills.  Great  Fens  appear,  and  great 
Marifh-^^round  :  Fowles  as  big  as  Swans,  green,  fcaled  on  their  backs,  in 
the  water.  ' 

,'  ■   •  the  firii  of  the  fifth  ^' Baftriane. 

•  The  fecond  « Cilicia. 

7he  third  . Oxiana, 

'       •'"  6.    The  firji  ef  the  fiKth ^  Numidia. 

Jhefecond Cyprus. 

Jbe  third Parthia, 

•■'  y,  Ike  fir  ft  ofthefeventb  • — -*—  Getulia.  .[ 

Tbefeccnd Here  is  a  great  Dcfart :  no  Trees.  ,  :i^:  j 

in  his  hand ■  Arabia. 

The  third. •  Phalagon. 

^.   i  never  heard  of  it. 

E.  K.  It  IS  toward  thel^ovtb^  where  the 'z/eines  of  Gold  ■■,  and  fucli^ 

A.Groynitrdpeople  appear  as  before  were  noted.      On  this  fide  them  a  great  way 

asitfcink.     ^pppj^j.  lYien  with  fwiniih  fnouts,  their  vifage  is  fo  ftrouted  out  j  butfo 

be  percei'ved  to  be  of  humane  fvifage.       The  women  have  about  their 

privities  very  long  hair  down  to  their  knees.     The  men  have  things 

on  their  fhoulders  of  beafts  skins ,  as   inftead  of  a  Jerkin  or  a  Man- 

dillion. 

8.  Ihe  firft  of  the  eighth    '  "'■"  Mantiana. 

People  appear  here  of  reddiili  colour. 

Thefecond  ■ Soxia 

On  the  one  fide  of  the  black  men  "  "^  ' 

The  third  —  -      

like  Spaniards  appear  very  high  men  with  Spaniili  Capes  witli^ut 
Swords  by  their  fides.     Here  appeare  great  Towns  •,  divers  ;         ^    "*• 
The  name  being  not  evident  we  urged,  and  CaUia  appeared. 

S.thefirfi lUyria.  :ri:> 

7hefecotid  ■ »f,') 

If  thouflir,  tkeuflialt  never  fee  more  , -_  To  E.  K.  ^;. 

_ . Sogdiana. 

the  third —    Lydia.  '• 


J  true^elation  ofG^,  Dee  Hs  ABkns  v?hhfpirits,  <kc.        i c;  ^ 


7hefirjlCafpif. 

Men  like  Dutchmen  with  leather  nc- 
'  ther  Itocks. 

j'Ae  third.  Here  appear  Monkies ,  great   flocks. 

j^^j^j^^  The  people  have  leather  Coats  5  and 

no  beards,  thick  leather  ,  and  Gar- 
thers.     They  gather  up  thinkg 

Na^ Ibefe  people  are  mt  kjiewn  with  you.  0 

£k.  Are  ri:  :y  not  in  Africa  ? 

Nal... ..  I  "7  *•'•     Now  a  dark  fog  covereth  all  the  ftone. 

Kiil.-.--  Stay  awhile. 

£.  A .   I  pray  you  let  us  go  to  dinner.     Mo'z/e  not^  Jf^* 
E.  K    'Ndl'uas^e  prayeth.     Now  he  pointeth  to  a  place. 

II.      To?  fir'}  of  the  eleventh.  Bithynia. 

Tif  feiotfl..    \^A  great  Citie,  and  the  Sea  hard  by  if.]  Graecia. 

A.  Ij  not  thac  great  Citie  Conftantinople? 

Kal Iti^.     There  is  the  feat  of  that  great  Devil  the  Turk,. 

Nal He  it  but  Tenant  at  will. 

Tbethirc^.  Licia.  , 

12     The  firfi  of  the  twelfth. 

E.  K.  Here  appear  handfome  mcn,in  gathered  tucked  GarnientS5and 
their  fhooes  come  up  to  the  middle  of  their  legs ,  of  divcrfe  coloured 
leather. 

Nal.  ..., .  Thefe  be  thofe  beyond  Hifpaniola. 

E.  K.  It  is  a  low  Countrcy.  Here  appear  'great  piles  of  ftones  lik^ 
St.  An^Ircws  Croffes.  Two  Notab'e  Rivers  are  here,  The  women 
hav-  great  covertures  over  their  heads,  coming  from  their  fhoulders,  as 
the  Hoyks  in  Flanders. 

0  ni  Gap. 

There  are  on  this  fide  of  it,  Ca  great  way^  a  great  number  of  dead 
Carkafes. 

Nal It  is  beyond  Gia  pan. 

A.  Then  it  is  that  land,  which  I  life  to  call  Atlantis. 

Nal Ikey  fir  etch  more  near  the  Wefi  :    7hey  are  25  Kingdoms  in  it,     • 

7he  fccond beyond  ajlacewbere  the  Gefe. 

I  India. 

India  in  the  heavenly  government  is  divided  into  two  partsl    This  is  called  the  greattr  Inde, 

7he  third  . .....a  great  many  little  Ifles, 

Orchcnif. 
A.  Do  you  mean  the  Ifles  of  Orkjtey. 

Nal No. 

A.   They  fecm  tobe  theIflesofM<t/tfCi&d. 

The  firfi  of  the  thirteenth Achaia. 

The  fecond Armenia. 

E.  K.  A  great  old  Caftle  ftandcth  on  the  fide  of  the  top  of  a  ve- 
ry high  Hill.  Itfeemethto  bemadeofwood,  It  feemeth  iour<cor- 
ner'd. 

A.    I  befeech  you  what  is  that  Caftle  > 
Nal.  ...../t«  theArkofNoc. 

Tie  tA/r^  ......  Cilicia. 

,  ^*^ Teuneverkjtew  t*«  CiHcIa.       this  is  CiMzj  where  the  Children  of  IJemrod  dwell,  m.w^j 

It  ts  up  m  the  Mounttins  beyond  Qith»j.  N«mrod. 

E.  K.  This 


H  6       ^/f'trm  %e!ation  of  D\  Dec  /.//  AUions  nkh/pirits,  6:c. 


*-. 


E.  K.  This  people/omc  great  Cyants,and'very  fair.  Their  Appa- 
rel is  Gowns  tiickt  up,  they  are  very  coftly  Apparell'd,  and  in  their  faces 
they  have  great  "jewels  lil^e  precious  fioncs  hanged,  they  are  marvellouf- 
ly  rich  apparelled  in  filks. 

14     lie  fir'i H:re  feem  as  if  many  houfes  Were  thrown  dourK,  and  Cajiles.    Paphlagonia. 

One/ jotte  Hi/I  appeareth  in  it  very  long, 

'JhfftCund pliaziana. 

•   7he  third  .. ....  Here  be  men  with  Iroad  Caps  li\e  Egyptians,  and  many  Mountains  are  here  on 

one  fide  C\\:\\'^i, 

•    5    Ihe  firfl Itcrgi,       Here  appear  Wo-tds^iVaters,  and  fair  towm^hut  the  people  are 

yeli.nr,  tajvKjy  and  have  great  lumps  of  flefli  under  their  Throats.       Ihty  are  to  the  South  of  the 
lalt  Ciliciens. 

Jhere  are  14  Kit^doms  of  them. 

Ihe  fee  end Macedonia.. 

I'jethrd Garamamica.       Teople  of  a  low  fiature,hlack,ifwarty  people^  naked. 

The  firll  of  the  fxteenth Here  Itk^e  men  of  wilde  gejiure,  chathed  Itkf  Polonians.  | 

This  Conntrej  is  .....  Sauroniatica, 

The  fecond v^thiopia. 

E.  K.  Here  are  fome  naked  ,  fome  not  naked  ,  covered  with  red 
Garments.  The  houfes  feem  like  Tents,  made  oFcioath  and  leather. 
There  are  great  Rivers. 

Jhe  third. 

E.  K.  Now  he  fheweth  by  the  North-pole  ,  and  the  great  Moun* 
tain. 

Fi  a  cim Here  he  feven  Kingdoms  y  their  chief  Citie  it  called  Fiaciin  ,  all  that  are  of  that ,. 

Kine^s  Ceunfel  are  Aiirommers,       The  Kings  name  that  now  governeth  it  Gapfacar. 
The  firli. 

Seeji  tbcuthiiCcPntrej  ?  ...4..  Cokhici.     To  E.  K. 

'ikefecond Cirenlaca £.  |f.  Hard  by  a  great  Water. 

The  third. Nafanionia. 

The  fir jl .Carthago. 

Thefecond Now  appear  many  Crocodiles ^hng  fifcked,fcaledcnthe  body^with  long  tailes. 

......  Cox  lant.    A  great  place  appeareth,  covered  about  with  tire.     <J\iany  great  Serpents 

appear  here  of  200  fiot.        It  appeareth  iierj  Eajiward.        No  feople  appear  here. 

E.  K.  There  cometh  from  Heaven  like  a  Mift  ,  and  covereth  a  great? 
place,  about  300  mile  long,  like  a  Park,  enclofeJ  with  fire.  It  is  on  a 
hic^h  giouitd.  There  come  four  Rivers  out  of  it ,  oneEaft,  ano.ther 
VVeft,  another  North,  and  another  South.  The  pales,  or  cnclofure  of 
it  feem  to  be  Arches,befet  moft  richlywith  precious  ftones.  In  the  Gate 
of  it  Hand  three  men  like  us,one  is  in  a  long  Gown  with  many  plcats,the 
other  like  in  aCaflek.  The  third  in  the  rough  skin  of  a  beaft.  In 
the  name  of  Jefus :  Is  this  the  f^^r^f^//^  that  Adam  was  baniflied  out  of. ^ 

The  very  fame  -,  from  hence  he  was  turned  out  into  the  earth.       This   is  the  true  Vak.of 

Jofaphat. 

A.   Will  you  give  me  leave  ? 

Say  on. 

It  fhould  feem  this  muft  be  on  the  earth,  not  in  the  aire. 

... ...  It  is  upon  the  earth. 

You  faid  that  from  hence  he  was  turned  out  into  the  earth. 

• Ihe  cvrfe  of  God  in  Adam  caufed  the  earth ,  whereinto  he  was  call  to  le  acciirftd.     For,  if  ' 

Adam  hAd  a.fter  hit  full  tarried  in  Paradife  ,  bit  rcickedrnffe  would  have  altred  the  tnnocency  of 
the  place.  Th-refore  it  ParadiCc  diUngniJhed  frinf  the  earth,  in  refped  of  her  purity  :  hecaufe  the 
earth  it  defiled,  and  corrupted  with  man.     The  earth  is  faid  to  be  finfull  in  refpeO  of  the  fin  of 


yuan. 


A.  Till  45  degrees  ,  both  liJforthcrly  and  Southerly  ,  all  is  knewn  in  the  moft  part  of  the 
world  :  But  of  any  fuch  pUce  there  is  no  knowledge  nor  likelyhood  by  any  Hiftory  of  tiiefe  ■ 
dayej^  or  of  old  time. 

Nal .There- 


(^Jtrue  '}^ elation  ofD'.  Dee  hts  Mtom  mth  fpirits,  ^c-  15-7 

N-il .therefore  this  Is  cunning,  and  the  wifjom  of  God.      Ihere  dr^Reth  ficJhhTit  that 


1>  txi a.  ..'I.  f  '.J  vf  1.    *  ..  .J    fj    \  iiiiiiiii^^^^    a.1  t*.i    lilt    vv  UUvJUJ  ur    VjUl 

(liall  never  die,  iFhkh  were  taken  up  for  a  tclhimny  of  Truth.. 

A.  £.''V  and  E>torf,,  by  the  Apocalypsdo  feem  that  they  (hould  fufsr  death,  under  Anti 
chrilK  if  »vc  undc;rihini»i£;hc.  There  is  E//V,  Enoch,  and  Jo/?«  :  They  fiiall  />£>;»  to  ie  dead 
by  his  power,  but  not  otad,  ' 


I'l^th'i'rd Iduhlsa, 


f> 


inteen       Ibe  firji  Parftavia. 

k^now  it  i^ot . 
'lie  fccpiid Celtica. 

• 7hdtweu>iderjiaKdconmo>t(ynort>forGz[\i-Ji.     ft  is  thxt  rfbich  you  cal/  Fhndri±    ths 

Lov  Cou«try.  * 

ihi  third .    E.  K.  Here  appear  men  with  tallons  like  Lions. 

They  be  very  devils.     There  are  five  Iflesofthcm.      Thefe  be  they 
that  can  dwell  in  any  part  of  the  Earthy  and  are  called  Pilofi. 
Nothing  difFcrcth  them,  but  in  that  they  have  bodies. 


Vinfc 


J  an. 

20- - 

the  firft.  ,  E.   K.  Under  the  South  Pole. 

Here  appear  little  men  with  long  beards:  their  ""•^c  '^'^ 
bodies  as  childrens  bodies.  '''"'''^'''• 

Nal. There  dwelleth  the  tvouderful  Emperour  of  the  IVorld,  and  the  wonderful  City  of  the /\  a  w-nder 

'^orld  :   Beie  are  an  hundred  and  twelve  Kingdoms.       Thii  City  it  a  hundred  forty  fix  leagues ful great Cicy] 
ehut, 

A.  Youunderftand  twoEnglifli  miles  for  a  league,  as  in  Friixcf.'' 

Nal It      1  here  dwelleth  the  true  generation  of  Chiia, 

Tolpam,  ' 

The  feccnd  — — •   Carcedonia, 

The  third      — — Italia. 

L,  Italia  znd  Britani^Vf  ere   before  applied;  thethird  of  the  15,    and  firft  of  the  14. 
...•.  Tljerefore  thefe  two  places  to  be  reconciled. 

He  pointeth  to  a  great  City  with  a  River  by  it, 

This  it  that  City  which  jhall  not  have  one  ftone  Handing  in  it.     Tbit  City  it  in  Italia 

A.    Is  it  Kontf,  1  pray  you  ?  . 

-Nal It  ii  Rome.  ^ 

.£.  K.  Now  there  is  come  a  white  mift  in  the  Stone. 

Ceafcyfaid  a  'voice. 
A  voice  ......  Stay  for  a  wbilei 

E.  K. 

Nal. Read  them  in  my  hand  as  thoit  feejl  them  [  ^,  He  fpake  to  E,  A^.  ] 

il  The' firji  -  ■  ■-~  Britania. 

The  fecond ■  Pheniccs. 

.   The  third  ■  ConLigincri. 

22  The /zrjl Apulia. 

The  fecond Marmarica. 

The  third —  Concava  Syria. 

*3  The  fecond  of  the  feventh    ——— ; 

.  'Xkt  firfi  ■ .  Gebal. 

The  fee  end 1  Elam  vide     Elamita:, 

The  third  -.  —- Idunia. 

^         Nal It  is  beyond  Greenland. 

"  24.  The  firft  ^ . Media, 

The  fecond  .-iz^  Arriana,  ^ 


15  8        <i>'/  true %^'ation  of  Yj\  Dee  his  Mions  mthjpirits,  &c. 

7he  third ■ Chaldra 

A.   I  bcfitch  yoii,  whac   d\Scrcth  th\$  €haldea  from  CtUeibcfoTe  t 
Kal iop  (hall  finde  the  difftrence  of  it,  in  praaice. 

25  _~ ■  7hffefe'p[e  Scrici.  w 

Ihefecond Pcrfia. 

7he  third Gongatha ■    £,  K.  Toward  the  South  Pole. 

26  ihefirji ■ Gorfim  ■ — —    Bcarcs  and  Lions  here. 

7h'  frconi Hifpania 

Ihe  third   '■ — "   Painiihilia • 

ijThefiril Oacidi. 

Gal There  be  9  Katgdoms Fair  madc  people,  Dut  tawny. 

'the  fecond ^Bibylon. 

rhe  third ■ — "  Median  - —      £.  K.  It  IS  much  Nofthward. 

28  The  fir li  • Idnmian.  Nal 7hey  aretw$  Ifles  environed  ivith  tttt  arm 

^y-  q'hc  fecond Felix  Arabia.  0/ ft?  Scythian  Sea,  yphichgoeth  in  at  Ma^p'i. 

•jy  xhird ■• Metagonitiden It  ftandeth  very  Southerly. 

29  7 /'f  firjl Affyria. 

qhf  feco-rii  ^ ■ Afnca  ^ 

Ihe  third •  Baftnani. 

^oThcfirjl- ' ~  Afran;  Here  appear  people  With  onc  eye  in 

nefrcofd Pi'^ys'^.       ^I^^j..  hcad.fecminfi;  to  be  in  their  breaft, 

Ihe  fourth Mauntama.    toward  the  Equmo::  lal. 

A.    I  lemember  of  people  called  Arimafpi, 

Nal. ...-.  Ihis  dayes  Leffon  if  as  nt'ich  worth,'as  all  between  thli  and  Mauricaiiia. 

Note Heve  are  15,  whichwere  never  kjtown  in  thefe  times. 

Thereii  arc 

t..  1  hear  nothiii"  of  P  Ionia,  C^tofchwia,  Vania,  FJibtrnia,  Iflmdia,  and  foof  many  6-, 
ther  which  I  could  name ;  what  is  to  be  thought  of  thofe  ?  in  lelpeft  of  the  diliribuiiou  of 
the  who!  e  face  of  the  rarth  ? 

Poloiiia  tfxi/  Mofchov-ia, /rr«.  #/ ^aromatia  ;  Denmark,  Ireland,  Friieland,  Ifcland, 

t^.  Arc  under  ^yg  gf  Britain  ;   jl>t'Ifo  it  is  of  the  reiK 

the  Rigittient       ^    J  biM'eech  you  to  vv!iat  part,  is  Atlantas  and  the  annexed  places,  under  the  King  of 

^w'tt'T'"     Spa  iii^3\\^d  the  fFe,,i- Indies  i' 

cth'^/'Tf      "'"         ^^-  ^^  ''•"'"  ^^^f'  ^°  appeur^theji  can  each  tell  vhat  they  own.        Prepare  for  to  morr.ws  AHioH. 

A.   Moll  glad'y 

E-  K.   If  you  prove  your  felf  true,  you  (hall  win  me  to  God. 

I^al fc-!  may  hf  anfwred  with  thefirjiwnis  I  fpol{e  to  day. 

A.   Deo,  Ope.  Max.  lie  omnis  honor,  laus  &  Gloria  nunc  &  femper.     Amen. 


Th'rflay  Maii.    24.  _ 

A.   Becaufe  E.  K.  came  not,  (  acco.di^v^ai  ic  was  bidden  yefterday  )  to  follow  the  Afti- 

on  :    1  went  to  his  Study  dooi,  aid  knocked  for  him;    And  I    requefitd  him   to  come;  and 

he  refuted  fo  to  do,  and  rave  me  a  (hoi  t  and  refohi^e  anfwcr,  That  he  would  neytr  more 
'Thofe  vro'dv  have  ,0  do  with  thefe  Aftions.  I  asked  iiim  die  rcalon  why  :  He  would  give  none  :  But 
he  fi'i  e  afcc'r  earneiliy  d.-nied  to  proceed.  I  tnld  him  rliac  his  words  *  yeflernighc  (that  he  could  not 
the  Adi-Mi  ijiisday  dcaie  )  did  very  much  grieve  me,  d'-c.  whereof  he  made  fraall  account.  Sol  went 
ended   nmrc     j^j-q  [j,y  \tuJy  a.'am,  and  commiaed  the  C  aufe  to  God. 

in'"le'cit'ra-      After  half  an  liour  and  leiie,  hecaniL- fpeedily  out   of  his  Study,  and  brought   in  his  hand 
b"rlK(orem™'  o"e  Volume  of  Comeltuf  Ainppa  his  woiks  ,  and  in  one  Chapter  of  that  Book  he  read  the 
StJdy  of  pta- names  of  Countries  and  Provinces  collcfted  out  of  Pf(>/ej«f;<^   (*  as  the  Author  there  noteth)^ 
fiice.  VVhereupon  heynferred,  th.!t  our  fpirituallnftruftors  fcerf  c/fwrri  to  give  M  a  defcriptitn  dt 

the  World,  taken  out  of  other  Books  :  and  therefore  he  would  have  no  more  to  da  with  them. 

J  replied,  and  faid,  )  am  very  gUd  that  you  have  a  Book  of  your  own,  wherein  thefe  Geogra-; 

phical  names  are  expielied,  fuch  as  C  for  the  moft  part )  our  Inftrudors  had  delivered  unto 

us: 


A  trm^elation  ofY^,  Dee  his  Asians  mih/pirks,  dec,       t  s' 9 


us  -•  and  char,  accordino  to  the  Tenor  and  form  of  my  reqiieft  to  him,  fo  to  have;  them  ex- 
prefled  :   for  our  more  pcrfcft information,  by  tiiofe   known  names;  to   undcrftand  tbofegi 
imknown  and  unheard  of  n?.mes,  of  feven  letters  every  one  :    whereby  they  (  our  Inftruftors  I 
niean  )  are  very  greatly  to  be  thanked,  and  to  be  deemed  (in  all  reatbnable  mens  judgements) 
nioft  friendly,  and  far  from  cofcnage,  or  ahuiing  of  us  :   And  farther  I  faid,  that  I  my  felf,  had 
here  fetdownona  paper,  all  the  pi  names  together  orderly,  as  wc  received  thern,  and  that  ?i.  Names  of 
I  had  here  brought  the  defcription   *  Geographical  of  the  whole   earthly  Globe:   and  alfo  the  world  or 
Pffw/'ow/w  cJJ^c/'i  fet  forth  in  Englifh  with  the  Chartes  thereunto  belonging,  fairly  defcribed  ^^'^.''''y 'i*''^- 
by  hand  :   To  the  intent  he  might  fee  the  verity  of  their  words  ycfterday  delivered  unto  us:  "g  °r"'riw  u- 
for  the  performance  of  my  requeft  made  to  them,  onTuefday  laft  in  this  form  of  words,  as  nivcrfal  Chare 
the  Book  hach  it  recorded  thus  ;  of  the  World. 

A.  As  you  gave  us  atafte,  or  warning  o^  Italia  and  Britania,  fo,  if  it  be  thought  good 
to  you,  we  aredelirous  to  undcrftand  of  the  reji  y  the  Application  to  fuch  names  as  we 
under(iaitd. 

Whereby  you  may  perceive  (  faid  I  to  E.  K.  )  how  your  rcafon  is  marvclloufly  confounded 
by  your  wilful  phantalie  :     For  fo  much  as,  wherein  you  would  find  fault,   in  ourfpiritual  " 

Inftruftors  doings,  Therein  they  hare  done  that  which  I  requefted  them  .•  asappearcth  ;  and 
that  to  the  intent,  of  known  Countries  we  might  undcrftand  which  Angels  had  the  govern- 
ment :  for  fuch  puipofes,  as  occafion  might  offer  or  require  ourpraftices  to  betryed  in. 

This  (  (juotb  /  )  is  to  groflc  your  error,  and  to  wilful  your  wrangling  :  But  I  do  in  nar- 
rower points  perufe  and  confider  their  words  and  doings  ;  In  which  though  fometimes  my 
ivriting^  (  after  your  declaration  )  hath  been  amended  by  them,  yet  the  occafion  of  niifwrit- 
ting  for  the  molt  parr,  hath  been  either  in  yourmifreporting  what  you  faw  and  heard,  or 
in  my  wrong  hearing,  or  writing  :  and  fometime  by  the  fpiritual  prcfent  corrcfting  of  my 
writing,  and  fometime  longer  after,  &c. 

But  for  all  this,  E.  K.  remained  of  his  wilful  intent;  and  fo  departed  to  his  Study  a^ain  : 
And  I  committed  God  his  Caufe,  into  his  own  hands,care  and  ordcringjas  niay  be  beft  for  his 
honour  and  glory.     So  be  it. 


Monday,  Maii  28.  bora  10  J  ttnte  meridiem. 
A.  I  fajd  the  Lords  Prayer. 

£.  K.  Here  appeareth  nothing  but  the  clear  Stone. 

Now  there  appeareth  a  white  circle  ,  more  than  ufiial  :  it  Is  as  it 
were  a  white  fmoak,  very  large  comprehending  all  the  heavens  in  man- 
ner, having  as  it  were,  the  breadth  of  my  finger  in  the  circumference  or 
border  of  it. 


{ 


L.  After  this,  an  hour  and  an  half,  after  divers  our  difcourfesof  my  Wife  her  fpeechcs 
and  ufage  toward  E.  K.  &c. 

E.  K.  Here  appeareth  one  like  him  in  the  green  that  appeared  laft 
i.the    Etymologic  of   whofe  name  is  Dk  illis ^   and  his  name 

Map f am  a. 

A.  In  the  name  of  Jefus,  and  for  the  honour  of  Jefus,  we  bcfeech  you  to  deliver  the  fe- 
rity of  your  meffage. 

^'^pf^'  •  He  liveth,  and  he  faith,  Jrife  up,  and  isy  unto  them.     How  many  times   have  1 

opened  my  amies  to  embrace  you  ?       How  oft  have  I  weft  over  )ou,as  a  father  ?     But  you  areflill, 
ftif-neckjd  and  difobedient  children.      Lo,  I  ccafe  yet ,  and  vill  not  impute  tbh  vick^ednejfemto  P'^te,  Ceafc 
yt>*.  !>•■:. i  ..    ■.:V>J  •  -•       not  or  Ceafc: 

[  A.  O  bleffed  God,  bleffed  God,  bleffcd  God  of  mercies.  ]  b"'*  '**]'  ft  " 

-    ,^^P/-  BecanfeMypromifesmaybe:  notwithflanding-,  that  the  forn  of  men,  may  not  fay,  From"pu^r'* 

fuch  a  day  cometb  m  the  Bridegroom ;  nor  at  fucb  a  time  Jhall  the  Lilly  fpring  :    Let  the  dar^  ingyou. 
,j^-tbat  I  will  vifit  you  in,  be  unknown  unto  you. 

E.  K.    I  thought  you  would  fay  fo.  a  perrerfc 

jn^  ^'^P But  thif  yon  Jhall  do  titter  part.  ^ 

II  : Bind  up  together,  48  leaves  ;    whofe  skjnpall  bear  Silver  :     Whofe    Perimeter  fhall  be  Perimeter, 

JO  tnches ,    in  length  ;   8,  in  breadth  7.  7 

A.  Do  you  require  it  to  be  parchment,  or  paper?  8  [jo]  8 

Map .1  have  faid.  7; 

^  What  fliall  I,  then,  do,  after  I  have  caufcd  48  leaves  to  be  bound  ? 

*^^P This  done,  rife  up,  and  perform  your  Journey,  as  you  are  c»mmandctU 

X  2  A,  I  have 


I 


1  do       A  true  ^(elation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions  Vpithffints,  6cc. 


Our  soing  to  A.  I  liavc  heard  onely  of  the  binding  of  the  book  :  Mean  7011  after  the  binding  of  the  book 
t;'e  Emiietours  jjjat  this  journey  (hall  be  entred  into? 

^•'""-  Map I ■ ■ — 77" -" ' ' ' • 

A.   What  ftall  I  do  with  the  book,  after  I  have  bound  it  > 

A  Pcrvetfc.      E.  K.   I  willanfwcr  for  him....buinit. 

lnvitM}»  Bono-      Map the  fourteenth  day  of  jour  reji,  even  this  tahle-Cloath  ,  and  none  other  fhall  he  fpread 

mm.  for  a  Bii>ikff- 

E.  K.  He  pointeth  to  this  Dia- 
per Table-Cloath. 

The  wrhlrg  jrbneunto,  you  fliall  invite  the  Angels  of  the  Lord :  In  the  middeji  of  the  table  lay  down  the 
of  rhcbook  by  hioj^  and  go  forth ;  make  alfe  the  doors  after  you.  That  the  heavens  may  JMJiifieyour  faith  ,  and 
Divine  mcins.^^j^  „,^^,  ^^  ,.  ,„,  farted.    For^  man  is  not  worthy  to  mitt  that  fliall  be  written :  neither  fhall  there  be 

^ou^r^'™''^'      f*md  many  worthy  to  op^n  that  book: 

Fo.rmoneth-,     I  have  entered  already  into  the  Emprturs  heart.  ,      ,        ,        ,       , 

Vidi  lib.  19.         lut  It  n^aj  be  he  will  bkome  wilfull.  If  he  do ,  a  hundred  and  twelve  dayes  remain,  and  he 

Sfpccmb.    I.      {s  not. 

>84.  f  ^^  7  Lj;e  cut  down  the  bankji  the  waters  may  rujh  out,  that  there  may  be  €  fudden  alteration 

Su>iden  alte-     r      ,  •       I 

ration  in  this    ^n  this ^\\<!>'^ ^  time , 

Yjjj  ;  .  *  When  I  warn  you  ,  yoPt  fhall  return;  But  you  fleafe  me 

*  Return  wirned,  as  before  was  bid-     „,jich  \f  yon  hdic\t.   If  tivte  govern  not  my  frovidence,  (re- 
dcn.  May  ir.  Bu:  he  meant  not  to  warn  ^n     i   ^  7  ^         ^  .     j  *•    ..  r     u       -^i      r 

usof.a/returnineas.ppearethbythe    pne  not)    but  let  my  providence  govern  time  :  Looknettber  for 
nineteenth  hook  :  1  hetefore  with  humi-     the  Sun  nor  Moon,  but  be  ready  alwayes. 
lity  that  doubt  muft  be  ineved.Be  ready  For,  whom  I  finde  aft,  fliall  be  made  after  :  And  to  him  tbtlt 

always'^-  if  barren,  fliall  there  be  little  added. 

Th  ee  dsves  J      Three  dayes  before  you  take  your  voyage,  jhall you  meet  nie  here. 

before  our  For,  I  have  fomething  to  fay  unto  you,  which  jhall  he  hidden  ^  till  then. 

jou-^ney  to  the      Let  L^^^Vy  jiretch  out  hit  Urns  :  For  I  will  *  love  him  ,  and  let  him  gafe  wide  :  And   take  much 

Emperour.  _     j^y  ^fjg  I'rjfel  is  wide,  that  be  (hall drink,  of. 

-  Vide  Junii  4.      ^^j.  f^-^  ^^^  defpair  :  for  hi  that  governeth  the  w'ndes,  and  dwelleth  net  in  the  hands  of  man,he  it 
is  that  fliall  comfort  him. 

Glory  be  to  God  the  Father.  Glory  be  to  God  the  Son.   Glory  he  to  Cod  the  holy  Cbefi.     AH  tht 
Heavens  rife  up,  and  glorifie  Qod, 
A.    Amen. 
Mi^.....,  Hallelujah. 

Th  Calls  or       ^'  ^  ^^^^^'^^  y^^^s  as  concerning  the  reft  of  the  Calls,  or  invitations :  we  are  moft  ready  to 

Invitations"    receive  theninow. 

Z^.  T    I  t'Jay       Wap F  ray,  that  thofe  tliree  dayes  to  come,  may  fatisfie  thefe  three  dayes  that  are  fa  (I, 

Ffi<Jj>,  Satur-     ^.  I  befeech  you  to  let  me  undcrftand  ,  whether  I  ftiall  take  with  mc  onely  this  Tablc- 

div  l3rt,<\erc    Cloath. 

]°.^J/  ^-  ^'       Map......  mtb  the  fliew-ftonc  that  is  made  foryturfelf. 

ne'£  GoTbe        ^  "^^Y^^ •  ^'^"f'  ^'"'  ^"'^^^  ^^  """^'  all  ready. 

tnercifull  unto  :_  ^«  i  underftand  that  I  (hall  caufe  the  leaves  to  be  filver'd,  and  fo  prepared. 

u«.  ■  A.  Mifericordias  Domini  in  eternumcantabo  :  Eiu5nomen  fit  benediftum  cr  hoc 

nunc  &  in  fempitcma  feculorum  fecula  :  IHe  folus  eft  Deus  Nofter  ,  Omni- 
potens,etcrnus  be  vivus  :  lUi  foli  omnis  honor,  laus  Sc  Gloria.       Amen. 


Saturday,  Cracovix.    iMane  circa  7.  Pofi  freces  aliquot  &  f>etiti,nes  meas  : 

fiatim  fere  apfaruit. 

E.  K.  I  fee  him,  that  we  call  Gabriel  ,  fitting  in  his  Chair  alone. 

Gabr Cod  is  a  ffirit  effential  and  in  himfelf :  Effetnial  and  workj»gby  himfelf :  Effential 

GOD.  i'^  "'^  worK^,  and  dignifying  them iy  himfelf :  So  that  the  beginning  and  ending  of  all  things ,  that 
are  already,  or  are  in  him  already,  and  to  come,  ii  flared  m  the  fountain^  and  tvell  fpring  of  all 
life,  comfort,  and  encreaie  :  IVherehywe  fee,  that  the  heavens  and  the  mighty  j  overs  therein  frovt 
the  bighejT  unto  the  kwejl,  things  that  fliall  have  an  end,  and  the  earth  wnh  all  that  fliehringeth 
forth;  jea, tie  lower  farts  {thoMgh  after  another  manner,  a}id  by  another  cevrfi)  do  allbang,  and 
are  el}ahlifhtd,in  and  lifitnthe  unffeakable  power  in  the  providence  of  him.  How,  therefore  earn 
the  Heavens  run  awry  i  Or  xke  earth,  (^fcr  the  EhCi  fake)  want  a  comforter  ?  Or  the  loncel^ 
■places  leek,  for  comfort  ?  If  it  be  fo  (^therefore)  that  the  heavens  cannot  erre  :  Or  if  the  fewer  of 
God  be  fo  mighty,  and  fo  full  of  prevailing  5  If  in  the  houfe  of  light  thtre  I  e  no  darkjieffe,  or  from  the 
Heavens  can  dtfeend  no  wick.ednejfe.  (And  why  ?  hecaife  tbiy  are  dignified  in  the  fewer  of  God.") 
The  Devil.       ^^*f  f^  ^^  that  fhvuld  live  ^zad.  diflrnft  the  Lord?  £*t /tfrf/».  The  power  and  equality  of  the 

Devil 


(7>yftrue  Relation  of  D^  Df  e  his  Actions  mth  fpiri's,  ^c-  1 6 1 

Devil  is  nor  oiiely  maiiifeil,  butaifo  dill  contendeth  agamjithe  power  and  vil!  of  God  :  ftirrittg  Fiftirg,  mlf^ 
upi  and  provokjng  '»art  to  faji  at  full  Bankets,  to  liudy  for  gooJ  and  evil.        To  nfe  up  again  i  the  l<kcd  o^lhe 
Lord,  arti  agaimi  his  power.      And  to  v-x  the  Lord  hhnfelf :  which  camtot  he  v  xed  at  the  wi.\ed-  Ui^vi!. 
neffe  of  the  !>■  vJl.     l.ven  for  this  cfrftyf'ryeth  the  Lord  uiio  you  :  H-w  long  wiU  you  wallow  in  wic- 
kednef^e  ?  H  w  loi'g  will  you  be    druHkftt  with  folly  ?  Huvd   long  will  you   rife  up  agaiufi  the  ^'* /^"niiuJi- 
Lord  and  againji  rtu  ?  *  Saying,  A'ld  if  thU  he  the  power  of  God,  Are  thefe  the  M  jfii'^ers   of """  P''''^'''^/- 
the  highni  ?    Is  this  the  vriU  of  God  ?  Or  can  it  he,tbat  he  hath  care  of  thf  earth  ?  Btit  tlj^fe  'are  the  ""'""  •  ''^'*^ 
hlafphtwies  ofyv.r  movxh.  B'<t  I  fee,  I  miift  diff"rie  my  felf  for  a  t\me,a„d  muft  raife  up  a  Table  J"^'"„f^^f' 
Tfhere  there  jhall  eat  wore  worthy.     Coufidcr  what  it  is  to  deal  with  Devih  :  Is  it  not  tutake  purt  fi«j  cjl 
ffith  Re!  els  ?  L  it  not  to  he  Traitors  again f  the  annointed  in  his  own  Kingdom  ?  It  it  no  t  a  greater  l^l»';'heraic». 
jiu  thtn  the  fi>i  of  the  T?:-vi!.^   For  why,  Ih?  Devil  ft  nueth  in  hnn^elf ,  and   therefore  h.id  his  fall.  '\  Punl'limcnt 
But  your  fn  is  f  y»ur  felves  and  by  the  Dfvil,  and  th-refore  it  is  the  greater.     But,  oi  it  is  fa  id  be-  °oV"er  tT  *"'* 
fore,  jyhere  is  there  a  moninient  upon  the  earth  that  the  peop'e  have  raffed  up,  in  the  remembrance  of  ya  of  G^d  his 
vicifdrtiffe  ?   M-iny  there  be  thit  fay,  Lo,  there  H\{'\c\n[z\tm.  Lo  ,  there  was  the  Lord  i/r/e/^.  moft  m;.ciluU 
ho,  there  thefloiUs  divid'dthtmfelves  with  all  the  reji ;  inremenihran-e  of  the  Lor i  :  But  ?z5;«f  V'fi  ingot  m. 
there  is  that  fay,  L",  in  this  place  the  wf^ed  have  rifen  up  and  prevailed.     Therefore    to  cleave  D<-3liiigwith 
unto  the  Lord  is  g^oi,  and  i  o  fallow  a  fenfible  Dodrine,  which  brtngeth  with  it  felf  the  loathfom  ieffj_ ,  h-'i^-yiu 
afwicked'iijfe,  and  the  liudy  to  do  W.-ll,  that  the  wickfd  may  be  Confounded.        Alas  !  let  th-  whole  Sopkftiy. 
tarth  rife  tp,  [^thn^fiing  r.p  his  hana~\  even  thifhand,can  gather  them  all  together  :  what  therefore 
can  the  Lord  do  when  h  jrowneth  ?   0  unreafonable  C'caturcs,  and  worfe  then  heaiis,  more  ignorant 
then  thf  Itahthat  grafein  the  Mountains:  Are  you  not  afraid  of  the  power  of  God,when  it  becomeih  ■ 
a  s\purge  ?   For,  doubt  you  not.  to  deal  with  thofe  thtt  are  wicked  ?   {you  of  no  faith^  wherefore 
hath  the  Lord  made  the  earth,  bn  to  be  glor/fied  in  thf  creatures  theref  ?  And  what  is  he  that  gU- 
rifietkGod  inearth  but  man?   Think^y'iu[n  f]  (therefore')  that   the   Lord  bath  not  care  of  his 
Jeople?   Jhmk^yoii  that  there  is  a  Seat  upon  earth,  where  in  be  hath  not  hidden  the  might  of  his  free 
fewer  ?  V  th  '^atan  g-t  a  Soul  that  he  is  not  privy  of  <"     Believe  ,  0 yo^!  of  little  Faich,  for  ir  is     F»ith. 
tJie  power  of  God.  it  is  the  Key  of  the  whole  vorld,  which  is  the  Key  of  mans  cenfcience  :  If  he  Faith  is  the 
lock^not  the  door  ,  b't  d'part  and  leave  it  open  :  H^o  be  to  that  Sou!,f..r  the  frince  of  darkjtejfe  en-  ^^Y  of  t"'"' 
ireth,  and  is  poffffed  to  the  eternal   wo  of  his  dwelling  place.       If,  theref  re  the  earth  le   /r  Cf  ir  "J^'^.^"'*' . 
unto  him  that  mule  it,  {m  afpeareih  by  his  Prophets,  and  by  the  S  n  of  God  )   What  are  yon  ?  Or  rhe^p^iiTocV* 
how   cnipcy  arc  you?  When  you   think  it  is  in   vain  ^   that  the  Lord  hach  appeared  unto  £.k    \  e  y  ve- 
yoil.  hctnent  y  fpo- 

But  in  you  two  is  figured  th?  time  fa  com:  :  For  many  (hall  Cleave  unto  the  Lord,  even  at  the  firll  ^^  '• 
call:  Andmary  fl-ial'  .'oubt  of  the  L&rd,ani  not  believe  him  f»r  a  feafon.       But  m  you  two  (hall  ^^-^^^^^^^^ 


time  toconr.a. 


g. 


dwell  in  one  C-nrrr,  {if you  (yet )  do  look^forward^  and  jlep  right)    So  Jhall  the  face  of  the  whole  r.aHib. 

tarth  he,  for  8od.  o»e  hundred  and  fifty  years.  Piags,zT.^-\:'», 

(For,  thetruic  of  Pi'^ad/fe  lliall  appear,  thatmthinz  may  be  on  earth  without  comfcrt.  V'-Mm  ovtle. 

For,  lo,  the  firii  (ha  11 1  e  laii,)   and  it  (hall be  a  Kingdom  without  corruption,  ^?o  years. 

Now,  now,  hath  'the  Serpent  willowed  his  fi'l.  c^'tT"'^^' 

Kow,N  w,  are  all  th'nz^t  it  the  prid'  of  their  wickjdneffe.  Para'dife. 

Now,n»w, is  the  Heir  ready,  moji  lil{e  his  father.      But  wo  unto  the  earth  through  his  govern-  P"^'dfewas 

htent.  fi  <^  mafie,  and 

For,  his  Kingdom  (l^all  have  an  end  with  mifery.    And  tbefe  are  the  Utter  dayes.     And  this  is  the  Y^^7  '"^  ^"' 
M  Prophcii'c  of  the  World.  y^',,^  P^j 

i  Nov,  HOW,  Ihall  one  King  rfe  up  a^aiH<l  another:  And  there  (hall  be  hloud  jhei  tbroughont  all  the  ""'le  annvum 
I  Wtrld:  fighting  between  the  Devil  his  Kingdom,  and  the  Kingdom  of  lijrht,  ^"i'"  "P-io.' 

Cntenti  nsand  q':arrels  on  the  earth  between  man  and  man,  father  and  fon, wife  and  husbind,  i^T'^''l  n 
Kingdom  and  Ri^sFdow  ije't ,  even  in  the  very  beajis  of  the  field  Jhall  there  he  hatred  .-  And  into  LiJlov'ffmi' 
them  Jhall  the  (piiics  of  Contention  enter,  ijlifunt 

For,  new  ronteih  the  ncceifiry  of  things.  T  e  lift  Pro- 

E.K.  He  now  kneeleth  down.  teiufycon- 

Gab As  fo' you,  thus  fjyeth  the  Lord.  Z"'  rr' 

I  have  cho.'cn  you,  to  ent-r  into  my  barns  :  And  have  commanded  you  to  open  the  Corn  ,  thai  the  tW.ZJ,l:de 
fcatteredmay  appear,  and  that  w'-'^rh  remai-ietban  the  jheaf  may  liand.     And  have  entered  into  the  '^f^- 
I  /Ir/?,  and  fo  into  the  ferenth.     And  have  delivered  unto  you  the  Teftimony  of  my  fpirit  to  come.      E'taion, . 

■■  For, my  B'trn  hath  been  hngwithoiitTh^eh^rs.     And  I  have  kfpt  my  Jiayles  for  a  I  ngtime  hid  "^  ^' '"'°^"'^ . , 

^mtmkjtownpl.ices:  If  hich  fiyle  h  the  Doftrine  that  I  deliver  unto  ^5;>.-  Which  is  the  Inirument  DcHne     '"* 

cfthraUnng,  wherewith  you  JhaU  beat  the  jheaf s^  that  the  Corn  which  is  fcattered  ,   and  the  reft  Thcfl  yVfor 

I  Hiay  be  all  one.  Gad  h  .v  Bain, 

(But  a  word  in  the  mean  feafon.)  ^  ^mcLUef^. 

^  If  I  be  Majhr  of  the  B-Jm,  owner  of  the  Corn  ,  and  deliverer  of  my  flayle  :  If  all  be    mine  ^  r^m  tair.ovi- 

(_Anduntoyou,  there  isnothing  :  for  you  are  hirelings,  whofe  reward  isheaven.)  '  ""'Jo'^f'-''  ""- 

■    Then  fee,  that  yo»  neither  threjh,  nor  unbind,,  untill  I  bid  you,  let  it  be  fffisient  unto  you  :  that  t  u.lTjif 

you  know  my  houfe,  that  you  k,now  the  labour  I  will  p"t  you  to  :  That  I  favour  you  fo  much  at  to  enter-  Note,biddirg. 

tain  you  the  labourers  within  my  Barn  :  For  within  it  threjheth  none  without  mj  confcnt. 

Fcti 


i6z      A  true  ^^clation  ofD^,  Dee  hh  Anions  mth/pirits^  <?cc. 


Our  uniting  F  or.,  tH  joii  jhti't  many  people  behlejfed,  and  in  you  jh  all  there  he  no  divifion  :     For  Ehu  and 

promifed-         Izcoh  jhall  be  jojned  together  i  and  their  Kingdtm  fioall  be  all  one :  For  as  the  Sacrifice  is,  fo  mujt 

^  ^  E.  K.  Now  he  knecleth  down  again.     Me  thinketh,  I   hear  them 

fay,  What:  fhali  become  of  Laskje  ? 
E.  K.   And  fo  the  people  fay. 

[  AsK  *"f  ••''  ^elhons  :  but  hear,  what  I  have  to  fay.  J 

Js  thofe  that  defire  to  make  a  fpeedj  Dinner,  and  to  entertain  their  guefis,  gofuddenly  euty  and 
c^ather  the  dryeii  wood  in  the  -wood-pile  :  Not  becaiife  it  is  more  wood  than  the  ether  ;  hut  becaufe  it 
A.  L.      ^U  dry,  and  viol}  apt  for  the  fpeediiiefs  of  the  kitchen.     So,  it  is  with  me,  faith  thi  Lard. 
A.  L.  The  apt-        p-,,^^  J  refpeCt  him  not  in  that  he  is  a  7>u:n,  but  in  refpeU  of  the  manner  of  his  minde  and  in- 


-f  J,<fHe,  cap.  y.  htra  in  this  world,and  a  lover  of  him  for  ever.  But  me  thinkfth  he  will  be  t  proud.  If  you  find  me 
p  6.  Michael  yf.ak^:  }^nowyou,thAtIamnotweak.,ofmyfelf  ;  but  your  own  weakncfs  may  be  your  con- 
illi  appareret   f^fjQ,^.     foj.  J  am  afire,  and  takjf  hold  offuch  matter  as  I  find  apt. 

t  Pride  of  AL.      E.  K.  He  kneeieth  again. 

fufpeded.  ^     I  Ij^^^  ^^^^  toldyou  (my  Brethren)  of,  and  of  the  manner  of  tbep$wer  of  God. 

a^mZurm        2.  Of  the  nature  of  Hell,  and  of  h^r  wickednfffe. 

Neccfsity/     '        3-   OfthecourfeofthelVtrU,andoftheneceffityBfthings. 

4.  Ofyottr  eleViioH,  and  of  the  end  thereof. 

5.  Of  L^-sk'ie,  and  wk}  he  is  eleSed. 

jjgfj  6.   Now  I  am  lajily  to  ferfwadeyou,  by  the  power  of  God,  that  you  make  jour  f elves  apt  and 

Apt  and  meet    meet  matter  :  and  that  you  may  ji and  before  the  Lord  as  acceptable  :  which  you  Jhall  perform  if 
matter.  you  intend  your  former  LefTons.      The  ground  whereof  is  Humility  and  Perfeverance,  which  be-* 

Humility.  caufe  they  btve  been  often  fpoken  «f,  I  paffe  with  referring  you  to  the  confideration  thereof. 
Perfeveiance.  dnngjou  one  warning.  That  this  ASion  pall  nc\tT  come,  to  pa.Te  ,  until  there  be  no  re- 
v'e«^^'  *  menibrance  of  wickednefTe,  or  hell,  left  amongft  you  :  and  yet,  after,  for  a  time,  ytuwuji 
have  patienee.  .For,  your  offices  are  above  a  Kifigdom.  Hinder  not  the  Lord  inhis  expeditions^ 
Wemuftgoto  Remember  he  hath  commanded  you  to  go  to  the  Emperour.  Hafpy  is  he,  that  comethwhen 
the  Emperour.  he  is  bid  Go.    And  foolijh  is  he,  that  goeth  not,  when  he  is  bidden.  J 

The  place  for       There,  uf:  thy  felf :  for  it  fhallbeakey  of  thy  habitation  :    -^k^  for  that  place,  i  ti&ff, 
which  my  An-  ^y^^^^  Qf  fl^y  Creation  ffa/e-^.       Love  together  :   Be  h:nnble  and  c$ntinue  to  the  end. 
^^f°^I^""°"       A.  Deonoftroimmortali,  invifibili,  omnipotenti,   &  Patri  mifericordiarum,   cjufquc  filio 
Asunder-    Redemptori  noftro,    ic  Deo  iipiritui    Sanftoi    fit  omnis   laus,  gloria  &  gratiaruni  aftio; 
ftand  as  vet,ei-  Amen, 

ther  the  Em- 

perours  Co'irc, ^ • -  

or  Frage,  Sec. 


Monday,   t  Craetvie  \  4,  Junii,  Mane,  hora  8. 
Orationem  dominicam g'nibus  flexis  recitavi,  variafque  juxta  propofitam  materiam  ejaculatienes 
habvi,variafqve inter  ncscellationes,confiderationefque  ultimgrum  verberttm  iffius  Gabrielis,  &c. 
After  almoft  an  hour  after  our  fitting  to  the  Aftion,  he  appeared. 

E.  K.  Gabriel  is  here  again  in  his  Chair,  and  his  dart  upright  in  his 
hand,  his  dart  is  like  a  flame  or  ftafFof  fire. 

A.   BleflTedbcGod.  A.  After  his  appearing,  he  flayed  almoft  a  quarter 

of  an  hour  before  he  began. 

0ab As  God  in  hit  effential  heit(g,is  a  Spirit,  withtut  demonjiratien,  ft  are  his  profeimit, 

frovidences,  workj,  and  determinations,  unable  to  be  meafured.  : 

£  E.  K.  He  makcth  curfie  :  but  nothing  appeareth  in  the  Stone.  ] 

Gabr Hereby  may  you  find,  that  the  love  of  God  towards  yon  (  0  wretches  and  fimters  ) 

is  more  than  a  love  ;   and  mere  than  can  be  meafured,  which  was  the  caufe ^that  with  his  own  finger y ' 

(  delisting  in  the  fons  of  Jacob,  J  kefeakd  this  faying  ;  yea.  with  his  own  finger  ,  thk  (Ihw  and. 

fign  of  his  excellent,and  more  than,  love  toward  his  people. 

Godhisjea-  I  am  a  jealous  God  ;  which  is  as  much  to  fay,  Lo,  I  am  your  friend  :  najr.,  ratheryturfather^i 

loufie-.  and  more  than  that,y»ur  God :  whch  delight eth  in  you,  rejeyreth  in  you,  and   loveth  you  with  thai 

Exod.  JO.  a.     atfcftion  [^  Jealoufie  3  which  is  more  than  love  :    rshichis  asmuch  to  fay^    as  7ny  love  is  fuch  teJ^ 

Deut.y.  a.       »>tfr<;  jo7/,as  I  am  to  my  felf.        But, O  }ej}iff-necl{ed  JtWs,0  ye  Strumpets, you  defpifed  the  love) 

ef  God, you  committed  adultery,  and  ran  into  the  Temples  of  Idols  :   whichwas  the  caufe^  that  thi 

hmen-iomh,  that  praiferlyou  I  (fore,  \' 

£  E.  K.  He  maketh  curfie  often.  ]  •  ' 

* .  Said 


J  true  T' elation  of  D'.  Dee  his  Aclicns  mth  fpirits,  &c.      i6^ 

....  Snid  ^!fo  ofjou  ;'  It  repeateth  mc  that  J  wade  this  peopU.   Let  me  raze  tkent  oat,  and  makf 
a  frople  of  ^thee.         Ihis  Idolatry  vm  the  cavfe,  from  time  to  tinier  that  you  becime  Captives,  *Ta  Mofes 
and  of  lyileritotin^  Ri'.ax.^igates,  aiul  v/thout  a  Maiier^        Vnto  jou  alfo,  thiif  fiiith  the  Lord  (  Urito  j^"'"'  i^-  ^ 
jot  my  Brethre;t,  I  fay  tb^t  are  here  )  More  than  the  love  of  a  father  ts,  it  the  love  of  God  toward  j^^  i  ^'^ 
you  :     For,  r,n:$  whit-h  of  the  Gentiles,  hath  the  Lord  (hewed  hinifelf  ?    Where  dwell  they,  or  vfbere  xhe  unmea- 
b  ive  they  dweV.fd,  into  vvliofe  houfes  have  tiie  AnE;els  of  the  Lord  defcendedj  fayingjClnis  and  furaWe  love  of 
thus,  doch  the  God  of  Heaven  and  earth  ni;an  to  deale  with  the  World.  God  toward  us 

2bi'ik,yju  not,  thit  this  is  more  than  love  f      Look^  therefore  iuirrofcly  into  year  felves  :  Vn-  '''•  ^-  ^-  ^-  '^• 
Cover  the  doings  ofj:i/r  We,  and  ferret  Chambers  :   Fjiter  into  judgement  with  jo'^r  fe!ves.    Unto  Exhortation  to 
thee  I  fpeak^    [  To  £.  if.  ]     Haji  thou  tiot  rim  aflrayfrom  the  Lord,  and  committed  Idolatry  ?     '  am.'ndmsncjf 

t^.  He  told  E.iv.  of  his  faults,  whicli  £.  K.  would  not  expreiFe  to  me,  and  I  dcfired  him  nfc. 
to  liften  ro  them,  and  to  do  as  it  appcrtaineth  to  a  Chriftian,  &c.  ^ 

Gab.  ......  Bnt  thuf  faith  the  Lord,  I  am  a  pure  Spirit   that  participateth  not  with  the  de-      God, 

filed  :  li'-fcher  can  I  enter  in  mercj  into  that  houfe  which  is  defiled.     A  great  fayina^^wy  Bre- 

tben:     for  hereby pu  are  wcnijhed  to   mal^  your  confcicnces  rlean,   to  open  yourfelves  in 

nm-eneC<,  to  the  Lord,  tbtt  he  may  enter  into  you  with  comfort.-    For,  fo  long  as  thou  deale ji  jfith 

wi\-i  fpirits,  will  the  Lord  kjep  back^his  hands :    and  thou  keepell  back  the  Lord.     For  fha II  The  Lord  Lent 

if  f:ot  '  e  fjid  hereafter  ?     Lo,  is  not  this  vtan  kjtown  to  have  dealing  with  the  wicked  ?     And  (  m  back. 

the  foolifh  voices  of  the  people  are  )   Is  not  this  he  that  can  conihain  the  wicked  ?    with  further  ar- 

gu:v;nts, by  repetition  of  thy  doings.      Well,  if  thu  wilt  be  the  Minijier  of  God;   If  thou  wilt  go 

forward  in  his  wor'>f  ;  Iftbo'iw/'tfeetbe  happy  timvs  that  are  to  come ,    thou  niiiji  aijiain  from 

evil,  <i«<^.'Z'3.'nnur:fwcep  thy  houfe  clean  ;•   Thou  muti  put  on  thy  lejl  garments.  And  muil  become  The  chief  Lef- 

humble  andmejk.     Let  n  tthyWfcbe  a  fcandalto  the  will  ef  the  Lord,  and  to  ihe  great neffe  of  ^^n. 

kis  Worhj  :    For  the  t>,wer  that  is  within  thyfor/lQin  rrfpeci  a/i/j*efl"ential  quid,  )  is  of  great  f tree  ^'"^  cflcntiil 

p,:d  ability  to  perform  thofe  things  that  proceed  with  power:   which  is  the  cav.fe  that  the  '''''^^<^  t;onof£ /f  li^is 

one(  cbey  the!:  ;  for  they  fear  themfelves,  wbe^.  they  fee  t/)?'feal  of  thy  Creation,  foii!,3nd  lodie 

Ibis  IS  tharefore  the  Caufe,  that  God  finding  thee  (  as  he  pajjetb  Ij,  by  bis  Angel)  fit  in  caufeot  his 
matter,  hi:t,  v;y  brother  (God  kjKW(th)  far  undtinViie.       0  Confider  the  dignity  of  thy  Crea- e\e£i\ot). 
tio  I  ;  Confider  th^t  the  rff^&ion  of  God  toward  thee,  it  more  than  love.     See  how   he  bearetb  with  ^'''^  ^''u* 
t'y  lyijlr-^nity,  from  time  to  time.     0,  I  f.iy,  (^  yet  )   Enter  into  judgement   with   thy  felf :    ^''''^  gn'ling  thee 
confider,  that  thou  art  now  at  a  Turning  where  there  lieth  two  wajes  <:     One  Jhdl^  be  to   thy  com-  fit  in  matter, 
fort.  The  other  to  thy  ferpetnalwo.     Let  not  good  ground  bring  forth  weeds,  lejl  it  c/jo/o? /^^ r  ""fit  in  life. 

A.  We  will  call  unto  God  for  his  mercies,  graces,  and  help,  &c. 

O,  confider,  my  brother  that  the  appearing,  ""d  workj  of  the  devil  are  but  of  neceftty.      That  is  "^^^  "ccefsiry 
to  fay,   that  he  x  fit  it  gold,   by    refi'iing  of  the  devil  may  vtanifefl  and  mak/  plain  to  the  powers  f  ■       ^'^^"^ 
andfpiritsofHeiven,thelirengthofhiifaith,andaffi:ranceofhisHofe:    and  fo,  neceffarily,  by   °       ,- 
the  froniife  of  God,  inherit  everlaiiinglife,  to  the  which  he  is  elected.       To  the  wielded,  that  if- cither   vrlih 
caufe  of  their  difobedien^e  and  partakjni  with  them,  that  are  the  Angels  of  darkjuffe,  (  even  thof-,  good  '^'^^ 
that  tlrive. a  g:iinji  the  Lord)  they  might  worthily  be  damned:  according  to  the  necc'TLty  of  God         . ,  *     ., 
his  jiidq;ement.      See,  therefore  they  appeare  unto  thee,  cither  for  the  greatnefs   of  thy  wickjdnefs,  ,^j^ 
or  ely  Leca.'fe  thfy  fufpeft  thee  to  be  elefted.      If  thou,  therefore  thinks  thy  felf  e'leded,  defp-fe 
Xbe-i  i^f/thiu  iherefore  thinks  to  be  a  fpirit  dignified,  and  in  glory.   Then  be  faithful  in  the  afsu- 
irauce  "of  hope,  and  refiji  the  devil:  that  we  may  teftifie  thee,  before  the  heavens,  and  before  TefUficnion 
the  Gud  of  juftice.  Angelical  of 

•*  -  E.K.jus  ^- 

E.  K.  He  weepcth.  ^^ 'W 

A.   E.  K.  and  I  aho  could  not  hold  our  teares. 

Ah,  my  brother,  great  are  the  joyes  of  Heaven.     Remember  what  Hell  is ;  for  to  thee  the  ^  For-  *  ^''"  ^ ''' 
nace  was  open :     Remember  the  vilion  thou  hadft  of  iiell,  and  of  her  powers,  at  Mortlake.      For  ^^  Morttaht 
nothing  (  my  brother  )  is  done  without  a  caufe.     Remember  tbm  co'-'ldi  not  abide  it  :  No  not  to 
fee  : :       Think,^  thy  f.'-  nccurfed  (  therefore  )  if  thou  feel  it :    For,  if  Sodom  had  feen  it^  they 
vould  have  keen  coiwcr^ed.  * 

E.  K.  He  praveth. 

1.  I  have  HOW  told  you  if  the  Jealotifie  of  God,  and  of  the  caafe  thereof. 

2.  /  hjvea'fo  taldyo'i  that  the  houfe  of  God  mufbe  clean,  and  without  fpot, 

j^  £.  K.  Now  there  cometh  a  brightneirc  about  him.  J 

3.  Lafth, I  have  toldynv,  rfthatnecejjitywhi.'hcaufeththe  devils  towjrk^,  and  ajipear  :  and 
have  exhorted  you  to  the  love  of  God  and  repentance  ,  which  were  the  things  J  onely  hud  to 
fptak,  of.  _ 

A.  O  Lord,  feeing  we  are  uniformly  defirons  that  the  Aftion  may  proceed  ,  and  that  we 
crave  thy  mercy  ani  i::races,  as  well  for  the  pardoning  of  our  wickednef>  part,  as  for  the  con- 
firmation of  us  in  thy  fervice.  What  fhall  we  look  for  touching  the  proceeding,  being  thus 
flayed  to  our  great  grief? 

Gabr lonbave  to  receivethe  will  of  God  (  but  what  it  isyl  hjiow  not  )  thofe  three  dayes^ 

before 


Con- 


1 


6^      A  true1{elation  0/  D^  Dec  his  JBionsmth/firits,  &c. 


V,d;M,i!,'i  before  jrriicr-H  your  Jouritey.       Jnd yon  are  alfo,  tf  learn,  what   the  Angel  ii,   ^nd  how  vixny 
»*•  2     S^ljeCrs  kehath. 

-         A.  Wuich  Angel  ?  ^    ■    , 

N}le.  Gab.  ......   Jhat  governeth  Hylcich  :  tthich  is  the  mutter  tf  the  4  Elewents :    And  which  cntly  " 

4  U  au'E'.ement.     th;?rinces  And  Governoun   a'fj   of  the  ^  E'enients,   {and  of  their  Geiterationt'^^ 

5  how  they  receize  mixtion^  and  in  what  quantity  )  fVith  their  MiMtfiers  that  are  under  them. 

A.   I  raid  to  E   X.  Thcfc  (hall  be  part  of  your  praftice  and  portion.  ' 

6  f  Gab. ......  Ltu  are  all  to  ]cjnjoynt/y  in  the  Harveji  of  the  Lord  ]       The  Angels  alft  of  the 

7  t  4S  a>^g'ei  of  the  heaT>eKS,  and  their  Mmijiers :    For  they  are  tbefe,  that  have  the  thunders  and  tbc  ■ 
t  E  i»  fcvcn  dc-  -ofindes  at  Cor»nundnte>it.         Jh-fe  makf  up  the  time,  and  then,  coTKeth  the  Harvefl.  > 

j;rces&  a  lalf         ^     ^       .^      .  ' 

to  every  angle.  L.    K.     He  IS    gOHC. 

"w.n^cs"'  *>•  ^^O'l  "obis  Domine,  non nobis,  fed  nomini  tuo  da  gloriam..     Tu  cnim  Altifllmus,  Om-  ' 

Thetuli  inif.  niporeiis,  f£mpicernus,vivus,  8/  verus  Deus  noftcr  es  :    unus  &  Trinus :   Cui  Angelicus  cxle-  '• 

ftifque   cBonis  decantat  perp:cu4,  Sanftus,  Sanftus,   Sanftus,    Domuuis    Deus  Zebaoth.  " 

Amen, 

«i 

t' 


Friday,  Cracovii,   J««"  8.   Mane  hora  j  I . 
Poft  prcces,  &  cjaculariones  varias  &  gratianini  aftiones  pro  magna mifericordia  Dei, 
crga  uos  8c  propter  E.K.c\\ii  jam  patefecit  mihi  horrcndj  Si  ran!tiplicl:i  hcrefium,'^ 
KOTA.  &  blafphemianim  dogmata,  quibus  illi  hoftes  Jefu  Chiifti  il'.um  imbucranr,  &  quod 

jam  (  coufelTione  praenfil'sa  )   vellct  facrofanftum  myfterium  corporis  Be  fanguinis 
Chrifti  recipere,  illifque  malis  Angelis  renunciarc,  &  omncs  illorum  fraudes  dcte-^ 
^gerCj  &c. 

Converfio  E.  K.  ad  Veum,  abdicatis  ?     js^t- j^jj  apparuit  hodie. 
omnibus  Diabolicts  experimcntis^  &c.C 

Albeit  the  like  had  never  happened  to  us,  (  that  I  remember  ;  )    but  that  either  Cloud, 
tUnaauftom- Vaii,  or  fome  Vo-ce  was  perceived  by  £.  K.   Yet  this  f  doing  we  not  onely  took  patiently  ; 
cd  abfsnce  and  but  £.  K.  ufed  many  good  reafons  to  prove,  that  fervants  ought  to  attend  fo  Jong,  as  it  plea-    ' 
fiiencc.  ^gj  j.j^gjj.  f^aji.,!-  ^o  have  them  await  his  coming  to  any  place,  to  them. 

And  bat,  abou:  our  own  affairs  we  arc  contented  to  ufe  patience  for  a  long  time,  but  to 
await  tlie  Lord  his  coming  or  mefsage,  \i  a  time  better  fpent,  than  in  any  hum  ine  affairs,  &c. 
He  very  plainly,  and  at  large  mademanifeft  i^;/ cowv^r^o?*  to  God  from  the  prafticcs  with 
wicked  fpirits  :  Yea,  that  he  was  ready  to  bum  whatfoever  he  had  of  their  trafh  and  expc-  ' 
riments.  That  he  would  write  in  a  book  the  manifold  horrible  Doftrinc  of  theirs,  whercbj 
they  would  have  perl'waded  him 

Ihat  Jef.is  was  not  God. 

Th-it  no  prater  ought  to  be  made  to  Jefus,  '^ 

Ihat  there  it  no  Jin, 

Tfhat  mans  f:ul  doth  go  from  one  body,  to  another  childes  quickening  or  animatieH. 

^  That  as  many  men  andwomen  as  are  now,  have  a'wayes  been  :  That  is,fo  many  humane 

^  hcdies^and humane  fouls^neither  m:re  ver  lejfe,as  are  nff,  have  alwajes  been. 

.....  That  the  generati.no  f  mankind  from  Adam  and  Eve,  it  not  an  Hijiorj,but  a  writing-^ 
which  hath  an  other  fenfe .  ^ 

"No  Holy  Gboji  they  ackjttwledged. 

they  weuld  not  fuffcrhimto  pray  to  Jefus  Ckriji;  but  wouldrehukf  him,  faying,  that  be 

ribbed  God  of  his  honour,  &c. 

Andfo.  of  very  many  other  moft  blafphenious  Articles  and  Points  ofDoftrine,   whereof 
more  (hall  be  fpoken  in  another  place. 

Thisforbearingsof  our  Inftrudors  prcfence,<  did  expound  or  conjefture  to  be  donegrcat- 
ly  for  the  honour  of  God,  many  wayes,  if  the  fame  were  recorded  foraenhat  near  to  the  very 
manner  ofthe  thing  as  it  was  :  for  fo,ftioulJ  appear  to  the  pofterity,    how  truely   it  had  been 
faid  before,    that  he  fliould  be  converted  to  God  :     How  true!y  God  did  prepare  £. /if.    his  .»; 
The  matter     foul  to  bea  \efiel  cleanfed,  and  fo  made  ape  for  his  viliting  of  him,in  mercy  and  comfort, 
madeapt.  whereby  the  lifeofE.  K.  ^'now  being  amended,  and  his  dealing  wich  the  wicked  clean  lefc 

off)  ftiould  not  be  a  fcandai  to  the  will  of  the  Lord,   and  to  the  grcatncfs  of  his  works  :    aS' 
was  noted  unto  u-  in  the  laft  Action. 

Alfo  I  faid,   that  iiot  onely  bis  Converfion  recorded  (hould  be  a  more  evident  ar<-ument 

Z^  We  left  off  of"  his  fo  oft  repealed  Elcftion  :  hutlus  patient  attending  this  prefent  day,(  \_^j  two  hours  and 

bira  II.  a  half,  and  takii;g  all  things  in  fuch  fort  as  became  an  humble  and  patient  Icrvanr,  J  will  be  a 

more  fure  and  evident  argument  that  it  was  no  light  pang,  fuch  as  he  hath  made  outward  ftew" 


J  true  1{claiion  of  D^  Dee  his  Miens  ^tth  fpirits,  c5c(f.      1 1^ ^ 


of  diverfc  times  before,  but  a  very  harty  and  (incere  converfion,  fuch  as  without  all  doubt 
will  be  found  very  acceptable  to  the  higheft.  * 

Moreover  ,  he  declared  that  about  nine,  or  ten  dayes  paft,  he  did  intend  to  havcotten 
svny  Jfcretlj  hy  the  belp  fplritual  of  thofc,  with  whom  he  had  fo  long  dealt;And  therefore  that 
ti/l  ftoWf  he  dealt  k)pocritica!lj. 

Bur,  whereas  they  to  fore  were  ever  accuftomed  to  threaten  him  Beggery  ,  (a  thin<»  which 
"he  molt  hated  and  feared.)  ^ 

'.  That  now  he  careth  not  if  he  fliould  have  want ;  yea,  he  took  it  neither  to  be  ftame  or  fin 
to  bc;4  :  and  tliat  he  now  made  more  account  of  God  his  favour  and  life  eternal,  then  "he  doth 
of  al!  tranfttory  wealth  and  riches,  and  to  be  entangled  within  the  danger  of  thefe  wicked 
fpirics  their  fnareSjWich  all. 

rtllb  he  now  perceived  hi";  great  errour  wherein  he  was  of  late,  when  he  would  for  an  af- 
furcd  temporal  maintenance  Irave  forfaken  the  dealing  with  the  wicked,and  fo  more  willingly 
would  havcfoUowed  thefe  aftions  without  repining  :  Saying now,that  he  is  ho  perfeft  Chri- 
AiiUtj  who  for  money  muft  be  hired  to  forfake  the  Devil  and  his  works,  &c. 

And  as  for  t  e  iOiie  of  thefe  aftions^e  wtuld  never  either  doubt,  or  miflik^e,  howfoever  tkey  fell 
«jirf;  aduring  himfelf :  That  God  would  do  all  thin£;s  beft,  and  for  his  honour ,  6""c.  Many 
OCiier  his  faying-;  very  glodly  \  omit,  thinking  thefe  lufficient  here. 

A.  O  Almighty,  eternal,  and  moftmercifull  God,  we  thank,  glorifie,  and  praife  thee  ;  Oblcf- 

fedj  and  moll  glorious  Trinity,  we  will  for  ever  Magnilie  thy  unfpeakable  providence,  Converfion. 
favour,  Eleftion,  a7td  Conver fieri  rait o  thee. 

O  BleflTcd  Jefu,  we  will  for  ever  extol  thy  loving  kindnefTe  ,  and  long  fuffering  toward  us, 
and  thy  Triumphant  proceeding  againft  Satan  and  his  Miniilers  ,  for  thy  Eleft 
fake. 

6  holy  Ghoft,  the  dircfter  into  all  truth,  and  comforterof  thy  Eleft,  confirni,and  eftablifli  our  Confirmation ' 
hearts  v\(ith  thy  graciou?,  and  continual  zeal,  and  love  of  truth,,  purity  of  life,  Chari-  prayed  for. 
table  humility,  and  conlhnt  patience  to  thy  well-pleafing  untill  the  end  :  1  hat  after 
this  life  (through  the  mercy  of  the  father,  and  Merits  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrilt,  and 
thy  charitable  embracing  of  us,)  we  may  for  ever  enjoy  the  heavenly  Kingdom,among 
the  blelTcd  Angels ,  and  all  the  dignified  company  of  mankind.  Jmeit.  Amen. 
Amen. 


Munday,  J?/«ii  II.     Minehortti\.         Cracoviae. 

A.  Afterour  prayers  due,  and  thanks  to  the  Almighty  for  his  great  mercies  and  power 
fhewed  in  the  converfion  of  £.  K^  we  flayed  ftill  attending  fomc  fhew,as  we  v/ere  accuftomed 
to  receive  :  and  among  divers  our  fhort  difcourfes  of  our  faith,  hope,  patience,  conllancy, hu- 
mility, and  other  our  duties  requifite  in  this  aftion,  and  in  the  fervice  of  God  :  E.K".  ofhim- 
^  fclf  faid  thefe  fentences  worthy  to  be  recorded,  as  the  evident  token  of  his  found  and  faith- 
full  turning,  and  iiitent  to  cleave  unto  the  Lord. 

1.  E.  K.  I  ach^ioTpledge  my  fins  hai>e  defer'ved^that  this  fe'ven years- 
I  fhoiild  ha've  fioperv^  or  fight  of  his  good  Creatures. 

2.  E.  K.  If  I  ftould  fit  thus  for  feven  years,  attending  the  plea- 
nre  of  God,  I  would  be  contented, 

3.  E.K.  I  repent  me  nothing  of  that  I  have  done,  in  forfaking  thofe 
[  was  wont  to  have  to  do  withall,  d^c. 

E.  K.    In  the  ftone  nothing  appeared  all  this  white  of  our  fitting 
lere. 

A.  Nihil vifihle  apparuit  in Chrjiiallo  facratOi  pr£ter  ipfmChryJialli       a- Monti j.  vie hh off, 
hijihilem  formam  :  ut  E.  K.    dixit.  ^^  '^^  '''^"ts    ^'  ^°"" 

I   A.   I  will  affirm  nothing  in  this  cafe,  bnt  this  my  conjefturemay   be     ""   .'-qj*"^ 
recorded  :  The  caufe  of  the  non-appcafance  the  laft  Friday,  and  now  this  Moundaymaybe 

I  *'.    That,  as  we  loft  and  refufed  three  dayes  adigncd  by  our  inflruftours,  to  finifn  all   in  ;  The  J.iftice 
Ip  now  we  /hall  call,  and  requcft  three  dayes,  and  have  nothing  :  as,  thefe  two  daycs  ic  hath  °'  ®=<^- 
I'iQ'nout:  and  it  ispolllblejone  day  more  we  fhall  h^ve  the  like  non-appearance. 

'''"^  •  Or  elfe. 

2.     According  to  the  premifTes  ;  Onely,  three  dayes  before  our  journey  fhall  be  begun,  fr,jg  j-^p^ 
fc  (hall  have  that  delivered  us,  which  in  the  three  lafl  daycs  wc  fhoilld  have  reteivcd,  &c. 

Y  Ot 


6  6      ^me1{tlatm  of  !>,  Dee  his  jBiorJs  mthfftritSy  <5cc. 


Or  elfe. 

Th-  convcr-  3-  TJiat  gre?it  caveat  before  not,cd,  (on  Saturday  Jtmd  x.  lall  paft)  may  have  fome  forc- 
fv  ^  /e^  tC.  Tvarning  of  xhi's  iur  faii'eHceto  he  fifed,  after  cur  ConverfijH unto  Ged  :  The  words  then  re.corded 
I...  .1  maac 'are  thclC!;  '  ' 

mil  Ilea.  _        if,js  AdioH  f^iall  never  c-cy>ic  to  faffii  untill  there  be  m  remembrance  of  vtcksdaefff^  or 

Hell  le't  amsngii  j»u  :  And  yet,  after,  for  a  time  joumuft:  have  fape^tc.  ■  For 
yovr  Offices  are  abive  a  Kingdom.  ^ 

To  cmicludc,;  whacfoever,  with  God,  is  known  and  ufed  as  the  true  caufejWe  are  content* 
-ed  :  Nptjiing  doubcing  of  the  gooJnelfe,  and  wifdom  ,  and  power  of  God  to  perform  Jiis  pro- 
niids  and  jCovenant  made  to,  and  with  us,  for  our  fervicestobe  ufed  to  lushpn^^^ 

^  Moil  wtUhigly  5  and  patiently  we  will  attend  the  will  and  plcafure  ©f  the  fiigheft  hercldi 
Intendini^  hence  forward  (by  the  help  of  God)  not  to  give  our  felves  over  unto,  nor  ealily  ^ 
be  invei^lcdjor  alhiredof  thetempracions  of  the  world,  the  flefli,  or  Devil. 

For  which  our  difpoficion  of  niinde,  and  all  other  benelits  received  from  above  ,  we  rendcp 
nioft  humble,  harty,  and  entire  thanks  to  the  Almighty,  molt  glorious,  and  blelTcd  Trhiity^ 
Amen,  Amen,  Amen.  ,   .- 


._ ___^ __,7 

fjltunday,  ]\\rn\  i8.  Mane,  hera  8.       Cracovif.  -in/ 

A.  After  the  Lords  prayer,  and  fome  other  peculiar  prayers  and  than!5:t-g'mng,for  the  ex- 
ceeding great  mercies  (hewed  in  the  Converting.and  Reforming  of  E,  K.  &  my  promifin<»  to  re^ 
cord  the  Aft  thereof,  as  well  as  God  (hould  give  me  grace  •*  and  alfo  craving  earuelUy  for 
comfort  to  be  given  to  A.L.  being  foiuewhat  opprefled  with  penfiveneffe  tofeehis  ownfub- 
jefts,  and  fervants  to  triumph  againft  him  in  his  low  eftate  from  high,and  all  for  lack  of  money 
and  wealth,e^c-.  j 

Suddenly  appeared  a  mighty  long,  and  big  arm  and  hand  in  the  aire  ,  to  catch  at  the  fljeiPH 
fione :  and  E.  K.  meaning  to  faveic  from  him,  put  his  hand  en  the  ftone  ,  and  immediately  the 
floneuas  out  of  the  frame,  we  know  not  how,  and  lay  by  on  the  Cufliion^  &c.  ,.j.\c> .  -i'S 

Pcflmeiiam         And  then  foon  after  appeared  Gairiel,  in  all  manner  as  he  was  v»ont,  and  on  the  right  fidtf : 
heram  ab  int-    of  the  ftone  Cthat  is  againlt  E.  K.  his  right  hand  )  as  he  was  wont. 

A»  Ghria  Patrr,  &  filio,&  S^iritui  Sancio,  ficut  erat  infrincipio  ,  ^  nmc,&  femfer,&  infe- 

cula  feculorum.     Amen.  tit^'"-^-; 

*     -       "  ^ 

GaSr The  comfort  and  peace  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  holy  Ghoft  be  amon^ft  rouL 

quicken  and  confirm  you.                                                                                                ^  '    ^ 

^  ^„j^,j  £•  A\  I  pray  you  what  was  that,thag 

would  have  fnatcht  the  pew  * 
jione  ?  * 

Gab......  Let  his  honfe  come,  that  hk  iniquity  nay  be  feen.  ' 

Thisfeemeth       E-  K.  I  fcc  uiaiiy  houfcs,  and  befides  them  a  fair  Houfe,  feparated 

oli'e^iX-  ^y  if  ^"^^^  ■>  ^^^  W''"/^  '^  offlone  and  wood,  and  a  fqitare  thhiff  m  the  eni- 

'Zi^gZ  ""f  '*'  ^'^'  ^  Turret,       The  houfes  of  the  Town  are  low  wooden  houfes 

is.  fmall :  There  appear  in  that  odd  houfe  fellows  in  red  Coats,  like  Pik 

;;  land  Coats.       Now  1  fccabiggc  man  firting  within  the  houfe  afore 

the  window  :  and  the  Jioufe  is  hanged  with  Tttrkie  Carpets ,  and  there 

h  wrought  in  one  of  the  Carpets  ("juft  afore  the  doorj)  a  man  on  horf 

bach^^  with  a  [word  in  his  hand :  and  the  man  is  like  the  man  I  faw  at 

Mortlack^w'nhTi  Wart  on  his  cheek:  There  ftand  by  him  twoboyes,; 

they  have  red  Coats  on,  one  of  them  is  a  little  fair  boy  :  There  itaqd- 

cth  a  man  by  with  a  fword,  which  he  delivcreth  to  him  that  fitteth,  and 

A-.  There     ^^  lookcth  on  it,  being  gilt  and  graven  on  it,  and  layeth  it  down  on  the 

k-cmrrhi^o  be  Tlible.  *  ^^ 

^^.eicalCba-      ^  ,         ^i  ■   ■      r      j        ,         ,  '^ 

ladcrs..  ^^o iku  n  a  [word  ,  wheran he  pittfth  hit  trnjl, but itjhallfail him.  ^ 

E.K.  Now 


The  A-ms  of 
Linitsp, 


j^.trueB^ebtion  of  D*".  Dee  his  ^Bfons  mthfpirks,  5cc,        1(^7 


E.  K.  No-.v   that  man  calleth  the  Icffer  bay  to  him,  and  rhebDy 
thereupon  runneth  along  a  Gallery.       Now  that  man  with  the  Wart 
goeth  out  after  ,ftrouting  himfeU,  and  no  body  with  him  :  Now  he 
calleth  that  IcfTer  bo V  to  him,  and  maketh  iigne  to  him  ,  fmiring  one 
hand  on  another,  and  drawing  it  under  his  throat :  as  though  he  threat- 
ned  the  boy,  unleilb  he  kept  fecrct.        Now  he  cometh  to  a  door  and 
knockcth,  and  one  like  an  Italian  letteth  him  in.       There  he  hath  in 
the  corner  a  frame  of  wood,  and  a  great  ftone  in  the  middle  of  it  (of 
about  16  Inches  fquare)  and  there  is  a  fire  on  that  ftone,  on  the  middle 
of  it.        Novr  he  taketh  that  engine,  or  frame  with  the  fire  between 
him,  and  that  man  (like  an  Italian)  and  carrieth  it  in^  another  Cham- 
ber.     There  thev  have  a  dead  mans  hand.       Now  he  taketh  out  of  his 
Casket  a  black  box  of  yern  (as  it  /hould  fecm  by   the  blackneffe  of  it) 
The  box  i?  about  a  foot  long.        Now  he  hath  fet  down  the  box ,  and 
the  fame  is  open,  and  therein  appeareth   an  image  of  wax  of  blackifli 
colour,  like  /hooemakers  wax.       There  is  one  like  an  Angel,  made  of 
red  ftuffe,  ftanding  at  the  head  of  the  image,  holding,  like  a  Skarf  over 
:  the  face  of  the  image.       The  image  is  marvelloufly  fcratched  and  rafed, 
or  very  rudely  made  with  knob;  and  dents  in  the  legs  of  it. 
"'-'  Now  he  looketh  four  wayes  :  And  fpeaketh  (the  man  with  the  WartThemin  with 

^         t  .       r  \  •  tSeWnrtin- 

on  his  race.j  ,  vocatet'-. 

■     The  houfe  aforementioned  fecmeth  to  ftand  without  the  ftone  ^   ^^^^owkke"^^' 

teyond  the  ftoJie.  power  can  en- 

Ki  1  fit  r     -n    r  If  11  11         J  ^^"^  within  ihi$ 

i:  Now  they  poure  bloud  out  ot  a  Baton  upon  the  nre,  and  lay  the  hand  ftone. 
upon  it :  and  it  frieth  in  the  fire. 

Now  he,  and  the  Zf^?/M«-//^e  man,  have ^Mfo«  Apparel,  black,  li'te[;'°^'j,.^''J;^ 
Gowns :  each  of  them,  and   the  engine  feemeth  now  to  be  fet  in  a  where  their 

'j^\  >  °  arms  are  pat 

Chimney.  oat, 

ij     Gih  .,...  Be  it^at  it  vas. 

^,^^E.K.  There  be  fix  fmokes,  like  fix  men  ftanding  about  them  :  and  ^•f"'"/ ?«'»A» 
they  go  like  fmokes  out  at  a  window,  and  there    ftandeth  one  like  2.  qui venenmti 
Gyant  man,  and  he  taketh  them,  and  rvindeth  them  up  as  they  come  out  "'"'""""*• 
at  the  window.     Now  all  that  (hew  isvaniflied  away. 

Gab thpf  it  the  caufe  that  Lasky  is  poor.       7hit  it  the  feventh  image  that  he  hath 

[craped  fo. 
.-      A..    Asitis  thefeventh,  fo  (I  truft)  itisthelaft.  A.  Ergo   Aii. 

n     Gab TA/j  i)- three  years  four  moneths,  and    trn  dayes,  i»«cf  thfy  begUH;  fo  long  bath  i^i^^   6,  Fe- 

fmtbe  Angel  of  thu  Lord  been  ready ^  for  tky  fafe-gtiardy   (O  Lasky)  jianding  at  the  window  :  and  b  uani  incefe- 
^ ready  to  binde  up  rtiifch-ef  prepared  agatHji  thee.  '""'  '^i'  i-""*- 

.    This  mifchief  ihall  light  upon  bis  own  bead.  ftindtn^« 

i^  But  if  th'^H  remain  my  fervant,  and  do  the  workj  that  are  righteoufi  I  will  fut  Solomon  hehinde  ^^^  Jinjovr 
yHh^Cy  and  hi^icijes  under  thy  feet.  winding  ui>' 

"  \Be  tber^^m  comforted  tn  me :  for  the  breath  thou  hreatheft  is  mine^and  the  body  that  than  iweliefi  the  6.  fraokci. 
J  if  .the  ^P^  of  my  hands. 
The  ei-rth  from  yf hence  thtit  cantefi  is  mine  alfo. 
'  '■  '^t^^ "  '^'  ^^'^^f"''^^  ^^"^  ''"'^  down,  and  none  but  /,  that  raife  up  again. 

'^-^E.'K.  All  the  ftone  is  become  full  of  a  fmoke. 

fei^ab,  Art  th-u  Oire  that  the  Sun  Ihineth?    [^pointing  to  A.] 

^  A.    I  am  as  much  as  my  eye  mny  jiidge.  A.  Li 

•  Gab. ..:..  So  fure  it  is^  thjt  he  fha/l  reign  :  and  be  the  King  $f  Poland. 

A,  Alwayes  1  underltanJ  a  condition,  if  he  do,  d^c. 

A,  The  will  of  God  be  done,  to  his  honour,  and  to  the  comfort  of  his  Ele£t. 
Ivo/l   ^A.a  Y  2  Gab Makf 


out 

but 


i 


Sk — _ — — ^ 

1^ 8       ^  true%eUmn of  Y)\  Dee  hh  Mions  mthffirits,  d^cf 


Gab 'JWtfl^e  hajie  for  your  jturnty. 

Ik.  O  Lorcl,  the  man  is  ready  ('in  manner)  but  liability  wanteth  :  and  to  ask  thy  help  here- 
in, we  dare  not,  hut  as  thy  will  isj  fo  be  it. 

Gab,  .....  'io  tit/k/n'ith  Cod  for  money  is  *  folly:,  f<>  talk^wltb  Gjd  for  mercy^  is  great mfdom. 

A.   Lord,  this  miqliiy  arm  and  hand,  which  here  appeared,  and  would  have  fnatchcd  at  the 
ftone,  what  was  it,  and  who  fent  it  > 

Gab. li  IS  a  wi'skfd  power^  which  the  Kings  Enchanters  have  fent  amotrgll  yon  ^  but  be  hath 

hisrevard(erritmtii':g.  .\^\i\,^\\, 

A.  VVhar  was  liis  incenr,  1  btTeech  you?  and  I  marvel  that  his  Enchanters  were  ablp  to  de- 
t«ft  any  of  our  doings  to  die  Kini;. 

Gab    .....  'Jbe  Ki}igkjioweth  not  your  dijinps.  '     "    ',   ^'[' 

A.  1  bcfeech  yon,  as  concerning  the  48  leaves,  being  commanded  to  be  bound,  aim  robe 
filvered  •,  what,  iF  I  ciiiifcd  feven  white  leaves  to  be  bound  before,  and  feven  behinde  ,  for  the 
more  aptneUe  for  the  binding  ? 
Kote.  Gab. .....  Vfe  thine  ow  judgement.     God  will  appear  nb  more  imtoyou,  mt  ill  you  take  yeur 

journey.  ^-  We  believe.  The  Lord  will  perform 

hispromifes. 

Gab According  toyoar  faiih  be  it  imtojou, 

^,     . .  E.  K.  Now  he  hatli  pulled  a  white  Curtain  about  the  iione ,  and. the 

The  wiiite  •      1      1  j 

Curtain.       ftonc  is dark.  -'    *^ 

A.  Semper  laudetur  qui  trinus  &  unus  eflt  Omniptens  &  feifipiternus.     Amen.  -^ 


irednefdiiy,  ]imii  20.  a  Meridie.     1584.  Cracovi^.  , 

A.  It  is  firftto  be  noted,  that  this  morning  (early)  to  E.  K.   lying  in  his  bed ,  and  awake^ 
appeared  a  Vifion,  in  manner  as  foUovveth  :  One  ftandins;  by  h  s  beds  head,  who  patce4  hin^ 
on.  the  head  gently  ,  to  make  him  the  more  vigilant.    He  feenied  to  be  cloathed  with  fea-, 
thers,  ftrangely  wreathed  about  him  all  over,  &c. 

There  appeared  to  him  [£. /f .]  four  very  fair  Caftles,  ftanding  in  the  four  parts  of  the 
world;  outof  which  he  heard  the  found  of  a  Trumpet.     Then  fcemcd  out  of  every  Caftle  \ 
,^.^,  cloath  to  be  thrown  on  the. ground,  of  more  then  the  breadth  of  a  Table-cloath. 
.i*t«'jn'^=tr*j.       Q^^^  of  that  in  the  Eaft,  the  cloath  feemed  to  be  red,  which  was  catt. 

Out  of  that  ni  the  South,  the  cloath  feemed  white.  ,. 

Out  of  that  in  the  VVel)^,  the  cloath  feemed  green,  with  great  knops  on  it.  ^     ?■ 

Out  of  that  in  liie  North,  fprcad^-p*  ;?brown  out  iwnx  the  gate  under  foot,  the  cloath  fcem- 
cd to' be  very  black.  ^.!.'vjn,o,3-  ,' 
Out  of  every  Gate  then  ifllied  one   Trumpeter,  whofe  Trumpets  were  of  ftrangc  fgrnj^ 
wreathed,  and  growing  bigger  and  bigger  toward  the  end. 

After  the  Trumpeter  followed  three  Enfign  bearers.  '  •'"' ' 

Aftei  them  fix  ancient  men,  with  white  beards  and  ftaves  in  their  hands. 
Then  followed  a  comely'  man,  with  very  much  Apparel  on  his  back,  his  Robe  havino  ajycmg 
train.  .«i«»<.--w  .Tjai,  ?ud<  srli 

After  him  came  five  men,  carrying  up  of  his  train.  01  aiam 

.        Then  followed  one  great  Crofl'c,  and  about  that  four  lefferCroflTes.  ,^    p. 

feemed  not  to      Thcfe  Croflcs  had  on  thtm,  each  of  them  ten,  like  men,  their  faces  diftinftly  appearing^ 
be   on    the     the  four  parts  of  the  QrofTe,  all  over.  ^ 

ground,  butin      After  the Croffcs  followed  16  white  Creatures.  '  i '."^ 

the  aire  in  a         ^^fj  after  them,  an  infinite  number  feemed  to  ifrue,and  to  fpread  thcmfelves  orderly  iiiAi 
^g'=^^l^^^«*'    compaffc  ,  almoft  befbre  the  four  forefaid  Caftles.  '     *      ^ 

Cro^  fcemed        Upon  which  Vilion  declared  unto  me,  I  ftraight  way  fct  down  a  Note  of  it  j  trufting  in-GoSL\ 
to  be  of  a  that  it  did  fignifie  good. 

Cloud  ,  like        Afternoon,  as  E.K.  fat  by  me, he  felt  on  his  head  fome  ftrange  moving  :  whereby  he 

the  Rain-bow,  deemed  tiiat  fome  fpiritual  Creature  did  viiit  him  ;  and  as  we  were  continuing  together  ,  and 

jI  had  red  to  E.  K.  fome  rare  matter  out  of  Ignatius  Epiftles,  Tolicarfm^znA  MartialHifo^e  of 

•jthe  Sacrament,  and  fome  of  the  CrofTc,  a  voyce  anfwcrcd,  and  (aid.  That  it  »  mm,  thJt  the 

fign  if  the  Croffe  H  sf  great  force  and  vertue,         "'     '-■       *-  '^^v^  tts>n?.' 

After  this,  the  fpiritual  Creature  feemed  to  E.  K.  to  Ke  very  heavy  on  his  right  rti&^tttf*^ 

as  he  fat  by  me  in  my  ftudy  :  And  as  E.K.  confidered  the  numbers  of  fuch  as  he  had'  uumo 

bred  to  pafle  out  of  the  four  Gates,  (it  is  to  wit,  i  3.6.1.5.)  The  Ipiritual  Creature  faid  ^  the 

•Tofj  sdj  ti^' I  number  1 5.  is  a  perfcft  number,  Gcmiiftinsr  of  1,4.6.1.  and  5.  He  faid  further  more  %  Goache 

>0  ^c^atherisa  ftanding  Pillar,..  ,K4^;,  „■  *4;::  ^\T 

A.  Upon  which  word  I  tskedhini,  if  [  fhould  write  fuch  matter  as  he  was  to  fpejit^^     -^^"* 
Andhe  anfwered  to  £.  £.  at  his  right  ear.  . 

... ...  /f  th»u  wilt-i  «'jh»  a.     His  voyce  was  much  like  unto  a  tiwiis  voyce  9  not  Im^, 

nor  hollow. 


A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  hk  JBions  mth  fpirits,  5^c.      1 6^ 


'^ 


......  Divided  with  a  ftraight  line,  is  one  and  two. 

-9iAi  What  is  to  be  divided  with  a  ftraight  liiie  ? 
,    ^....  the  Tillar. 

'!%.    in  the  name  of  Tefiis,  who  art  thou  > 

sal  3t   \r,  -^ 

Jhe  fervaKt  of  GoJ. 

<M^&a4^c  thou  fent  from  GodjWith  good  tydiiigs  or  raeflage  ? 

IFhizt  I  am  he  kj:owethy  of  whtm  I  hear  witnejfe. 

A.  Whatisyoiir  name,  either  as  you  are  notified  among  the  blefl"ed  Angels,  or  called  by> 
of  any  mortal  man  ?  If  you  be  of  Verity,  and  fo  of  Charity ,  yoUiCanaot  millike  my 
fpeechc!-,,  ..j   ,  -  ''-^'Isrv 

-'^E.K.  He  fa}  eth  nothing. 

A.  Belike  he  is  not  fenc  unto  us  by  God  :  for  if  he  were,  he  would  da  his  mef- 
fage. 

lam  AVE.  .J^    * 

A.  This  AVE    is  one  el^K^ii  filiorum  y  of    whofe    order    Reck  is,    vide  ftp.  lib,  2. 

A.  If  you  ht  AVE,  In  the  name  of  Jefus ,  fay,  that  all  wicked  Angels  are  juftly 
condemned:  and,  that,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  in  the  merits  of  Chrift,  mankind,  eleft,  is  to 
be  faved.    f 

Ave the*  vifitdt ion  of  Gody  is  twofold  :   \_i^  In  refpeci  of  •  fi. K.  and  I  faij  now  i.i our 

bitfecretwi'landpurpofe:    and  in  particularity.      And   in  that   he  "Ik  t«e:«he, That  God  would 

bath  [2]  fealed  us,  w.th  the  good  will  of  manK'nd  to  their  comfort.  But  "^l^^^^^  ;',\|';;«  Is'J.TIaft 

if  I  be  a  fcandaho  thi  vfordy  then  ami  not  of  righteoufntffe  :    But  my  affi  med  )  Therefore  whitfo- 

righteoufncjfeit  of  thevorld:   TAcrf/orf,  That  I  vifit  youof  my  felf,  ever   came  before   was  to  be 

can  be  no  offence.       thife  that  are ^  and  die  in  wickjdneffei  are  dipo-  doubted  as  an  illufion.     He 

Hourahle,  and  far  from  the  mercies  tf  God:    For  it  is  writteny  I  am  'J^^r  andSnro'*   ^'^  %' 

A  God  to  the  living.      therefore y  do  I  dijhonour  them  :  fuch  {I  fay)  hrm»kc"h  anfwM. ™^  "** 
*j  arevickjd. 

the  mercies  of  God,  (  which  it  the  true  Manna  )  comforteth  the  comforted,  and  giveth  hope  of    ..  .      .,, 
nmendmentyof  fu:h  asrmtafirayy  are  finnersy   and   may   return:     thereforeyl  fay,  the  mercies  ^''"^'"^" 
Q  of  God  ~\  (  which  is  the  Fountain  and  fweetneffe  of  the  love  of  God  )  it  a  thing  moji  blejfedy  moji    ' ' 
bolyymji  to  be  defired  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  of  wf,  the  creature  and  fervant  of  Gtdy   to  be 
reverently  fpokjn  ofy  and  required  :  For,  it  is  the  food  wherewith  we  live  :    even  the  very  bread 
vherewith  we  are  rejoyced.       Thus  muchj  thou  haft  required, 

A.  Fdidfo:  forfo,  is  his  Juftice  againft  the  impenitent,  and  his  mercies  to  his  Eleft 
-tcftified  truely. 

Ave Havepatience:    Iwillreturn  after  a  few  moments. 

^^.  Hereupon,  (  in  the  mean  fpace)  we  conlidered  the  premifes  ;  and  liked  very  well  of 
the  fcandal,  or  offence,  avoiding  :  Becaufe  it  was  laftly  {Jnnii  i8)faid,  God  will  appear  no 
more  to  you,  until  you  take  your  journey. 

And  fecondly  heanfwered  my  requeft  of  God  his  Juftice  againft  the  wicked  Angels,  and 
alfo  of  his  mercies  towards  mankind.  .-   >  sfs. 

A.  About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after,there  feeriicd  a  thing  to  come  again  on  E.K.  his  righ^j^ote  tSii 
fhonlder :    and  (  as  before  )  he  caufed  his  (houlder  to  be  very  warm  where  it  lighted  on.       manner  of  t' 

A.  Benediftus  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini.    Hallelujah.  *'»"'g  ^«'*.  .. 

■*  '  warm  on  the 

E.K.    Amen  right (houlder; 

^['f^^i;}.:..  the  place  it  fanaified. 

^*'^^  Sanftus,  Sa,naus,San£l:us,  eft  DominusDeus  Zebaoth. 

^/  Aye 1,'iit  the  favour  ofGody  confideriHg  (aniby  force  ofhisfecret  love  toward  y»u)  kow 

Satan  purpofeth, yet,  and  daily  to  overcome  yoUy  thought  goody  (  tkrcugh  the  mercies  oJGod  )  to 

^f^ent  his  malice,  and  the  efeCi  there  jf.  '"■''  ^'' 

"toiw.    O  blefscd,  be  thou,  our  God  of  mercies  and  all  comfort. 
_  'f  ^^e.  ......that,  (  although,  yet,  then  arveH  be  not  )  the   Vineyard  might  yeild  fomc  fruit: 

•■»)ifrei>  God  might  be  glorified, /r«^  jo«,  (indefpite  of  the  world)  revived  and  comforted,fot  the  glotjf 

might  reioyce ,  and  fhake  off  the  prefent  cares  to  come.      For  if  thofe  that  be  unworthy^  can  feem  to  of  God. 

he  lifted  up,  and  to  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  Earth,  by  the  tempter  :    Much  moreoHght  the  true  fer- 

vants  of  God,  to  feel  hit  fatherly  goodnefe.      thofe  that  truji  in  me  (  faith  the  Lord  )  Jhall  not  be 
'  Striven  to  defpair  ;  neither  will  Ifufer  the  beaji  of  the  field  to  tread  fnch  as  I  delight  in  mdsr 


170      A  true1{cktionofDx,  Dtthis  jBiom  mth /pints, &ic. 


ffJu     The  Earth  iJ  »ii»e,  and  the  glory  thereof  :   The  Heavens  are   wine  alfo,   and  the  Cow  fort  5 
that  are  in  them.      Why  hath,  (  Therefore  )  the  father  of  Dar^neffe,  rtfen  up  faying.         ^  ^^ 

1.  I  will  flnit  up  the  Earth  from  them  ? 

2.  I  will  feal  up  the  mindes  of  men  :   ani  they  fhall  become  barren  towards  them  ?        u[  I 

3.  Their  miferies  fhall  be  great,  even  unto  death  ? 
The  malice  cf      For  thk  caufe  :  That  he  midlA  waken  the  Lord,  when  he  is  afleep  :  That  thofe  that  truft  in  him, 
Sitan  i.K.vok-  ,„i^ht  he  comforted.     He  hath  fealed  the  Earth  from  you,   and  I  will  open  it  unto  you  ;  He 
"''m'  -r'h-r  hath  faid,  you  Jha  II  hs\}OOV:   B'tt  I  fay,  yon  pall  become  exceeding  rich. 

h="thouglK  to        I.  /will bleffeyoii  with  a  twofold  blefing  :  That  the    Earth    may  be  open  WKfajTiK  (  which  at 
)>-cv»il.'"  So    ia,a^  you  fliall  conteniii. 

hulJ'fz'yTo-       i.    Ay.dthat  my  blefvig  and  laws  may  dwell  amongji  you  :    rcherein  you  fliall  rejoyce  unto 
veil    that  the  the  end. 
affliae.j  miphc  q  bleJTed,  bleffed,  blefled,  God  of  power,  goodnefle,  and  wifdom, 

bcconvor-ri,  '  "  '  ,  ,  r     ,r        1  .  ^ 

nlthe   nffli-       Ave This  was  the  caufe  that   I  appeared   to  thee,    fc.  A.    this   morning.     Now  therefore  ' 

^erconroun-    ij^ark^nt  unto  me  :  for  I  wi  /  open  unto  you  the  fecret  kno#ted|eof  the  Earth,  that  you  may 

''^'^*  f  deal  wicb  her,  by  fuch  as  govern  her,   at  your  pleafure;  aijBkll  her  to  a  reckoning,   as  a 

the  Exrih.       Steward  doth  the  fervmts  of  hn  Lnd.  TKP' 

I  expound  the  Vifion.  ^ 

4  Angtli  Tin*.  q-j^^  ^  hottfes,  are  the  4  Jngels  of  the  Earth,  which  are  the  4  Overfeers,  and  Jfatch-towers,  that 
the  eternal  God  in  his  providence  hath  placed,  againft  the  ufurping  blafphemy,  mifufejand  Aealtlv' 
of  the  wicked  and  great  enemy,  the  Devil.  To  the  intent  that  being  put  out  to  the  Earthy  hit 
envious  will  might  be  bridled,  the  determinations  of  God  fulfilled,  and  his  creatures  l^ept  and  pre-' 
fervcd,  within  the  compalTe  and  meafure  of  order. 

What  Satan  doth,  theyfuffer  ',  And  what  they  winkat,  hewrajieth  :  But  when  he  thin\eth  him' 
felf  m};i  affured,  then  feeleth  he  the  bit. 
f  '^'"g-  In  each  of  thefe  Houfes,  the  Chief  Watchynan,  it  a  mightj  Prince^  a  mighty  Angel  of  the  Lord  : 

P  ■  CCS        which  hath  under  him  5  Princes  (  thefe  names  I  misii  ufe  for  your  inilrticlion.     The  feal$   and  aittho- 
^  '       rittes  of  thefe  Houfes,  are  confirmed  in  the  beginning  of  the  PVorld.      Vnto  every  one    of  them,  he 

/^chara[fers,{Tol{ensoftheprefenceofthefonofGod:   by  whom  all  things  were  made  in  Crea< 
tion. )  } 

Ejtfignes,  upon  the  Image  whereof,  it   death  :    whereon  the  Redemption  of  tHankJnd  it  efiaJ^ 
hlijhed,  and  with  the  which  he  fliall  come  to  judge  the  Earth. 
4  Angel?.  T^kefe  are  the  Charatiers^  and  natural  markj  of  holineffe.     Vnto  thefe  ,  belong  four  Angels 

fcverally,  ', 

The  14  Seniors        ^  ,  1       n     t  \.  t       t  "'• 

in  the  Apoca-       T^be   24  old  men,  are  the  24  Seniors,  that  St.  John  remembreth.  ^^ 

lyps-  Thefe  judge  the  government  of  the  Caliles,  and  fullfil  the  will  of  Gtd,  as  it  is  written.  i 

7"l)e  Ti  names        The  12  Banners  are  the  12  names  of  God,  that  govern  all  the  creatures  ufen  the  Earth}V:fihte^ 

of  God.  and  invifible,  comprehending  3,  4,  and  5. 

The  /ingelsof       Qui  of  thefe  Croffes,  come  the  Angels  of  all  the  Aires  :  which  frefent/y  give  obedience  to  the'' 

%'^f7rs    ^'^^"f ""■"'  ^''^'^  ^^^y  ^^^  ^'^*^"**  * 

Hereby  may  you  fubvert  whole  Countries  without  Armies  :   which  you  muft,  and  (hall  do,  foy,j 
the  glory  of  God. 

By  thefe  you  fliall  get  the  favoftr  of  all  the  Princes,  whom  you  ta\e  pity  of,  orwifhwell  unto.  't 
i^ftke  *"  Hereby  fhall  you  kjiow  the  fecret  Treafures  of  the  waters,  and  unkjtown  Caves  cf  the  Earth.      '^ 

And  it  (hall  be  a  roUrine,  for  you  onely,  the  inlirument  of  the  World.  ^-^ 

Th   K'jK  ¥or,the  re(i  of  your  InjiruUions  ,    aire  toHci/«g  the  Heavens,  and  the  time  to  come  :    eftbes 

inftrufiioni.     ''^'hich,  this  is  the  laji  and  extream  kjtowledg^  j  rjriT 

This  will  I  deliver  unto  you,  (  becaufe  I  have  yeilded  you  before  the  Lord.  )  ■  c^^^ 

On  Monday  Vpon  Monday  next,  I  will  appear  unto  you  :  and  fhall  be  a  LefTon  of  a  few  dayes. 

next  x%Junu.  I  J  :>t:t  J  •>  j 

E.  K.  The  will  of  God  be  done. 

A.    Amen. 
Ave In  the  meanfeefon,  defireyou  of  God,fuch  things,  as  are  necejfury  for  you.  ,  ^^-.m    ^ 

He  that  filleth  all  things,  and  from  whom  all  things  live,  and  in,    and  through  whom,  tbej^mn& 
Ablefling.        fanSified,  b/effeyou,  and  confirm  you  in  peace.  ■  ••.bol  zii 

A.   Amen.  id 

A.  I  befeech  you,  to  Notifie  this  mornings  Vifion,  by  words  :  as  all  other  holy  Prophets 
have  recorded  theirs. 

A've A  Vi^ 


"^^P'true ^efdtibn  o^D^'/Dee  his  Jclims  mth  fpiritSy  ccc»        17 i 


A<ve A  Viiion. 

The  fign  of  the  love  of  God  toward  his  faithful.         Four  fumfhious  and  helUgerant  eafilcs^ 
tfit  of  th' which  feunded  Trumpets  thri  e. 
'I     "Ihefi^ft  of  (J^ijejiy,  the  Cloth  of  pijjazey  vcas  caii  forth. 

Jh'ihe  ^I'Jt,  the  doth  red ;  after  the  newfmitten  blood.  Red. 

Tn  thy  South}  the  (.-Lth  wh-tey  LiHj-  co'our.  White. 

Jntke  Weji  a.  clothjtVe  skjnsof  manj  Dragivs^gy-een  :    garlickj-hUded.  «'"t* 

J-  ^Im -the  North,  the  cloth.  Hair-coloured^  Bifhtrj  ]vy:e.        The  Trumpets   f.ind  on:e.        The       "'*^'^ 
Gates  open.         The  four  C.iftlcs  are  moved-.        There   ijfuetb  4  Trumpeters,  whofe  Trumpets  are  a. 
■j^r^-minjfix  Cones,i>ireathed.        There  followeth  out  of  every    Cajile   ^,  holding  up  their   Bunnsrs   ■ 
il^plajed,  with  enfigne,  the  na>Mes  of  Gid.         .lh:re  fol'ofv  Seniors  fx,    a'.ikf  from  the  ^.Gxtes  ' 
jifter  them  Cometh  frofK  every  \>!irt  AKi'ng  :   whofe  Princes  are  fiv,  gardant,   and  holding  up  his 
train.       Next  ijf^eth  the  Crjffe  of  ^  Jne^les,  cf  the  M-'jejiy  of  Creation  in  Goi  attended  tJpon 
everyone,  with  4  ."  a  white  Clo'id,  4  Crojfes,  bearing  the  witnejfes  of  the  Covenant  of  Gid,  with  the 
^friHce  gone  out  before  :  which  were  confirined,every  o«f,with  ten  h.ngt\i,vifihle  in  count  en  ancii-*  ^^^a 
atfter  every  Cr^'Jfe,  attend eth  16  Angels,  d/fpoftt or:  of  the  will  of  thofe,  thit  govern  theC'iiUes.  40.  Angels,  on 
ihey  proceed.     A-td,  in,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  Court,   the  Enfgns  l{eep  their  Jtandmgs,  op- t^^  ^  CioRcs, 
pofite  to  the  middle  of  the  Gate   :     the  reft'paufe.  ,     The  24  Senators  meet  :    They  feem  te '"*""^!"6  °" 
confult.  .     ^  i<?AngcU. 

4^%  AVE,  ST'dOD  BY  THE   SEER  : 

It  vanijheth, 
^  So  [  leave  you.  4i'-_  .•: 

A.  Omnium  bonortim  largttori.  Omnipotent!  Deo,  fit  sterna  laus,  gratiariim  aftio,  honor 
omnis,  &  Jubilatio.        A^en. 


I 

I 


I 


-v.'.f     '    Junii,   22,23.  Note. 

r^Ort'Friday,  and  efpecially  Saturday,  E.  K.  had  great  Temptations  not  to  credit  this 
Aftion,  and  was  faid  unto  by  a  voice,  how  our  Inlhuftors  would  ufe  cavillation  of  our  dif- 
ordered  life,  to  forfake  us,  and  not  to  perform,  according  to  our  fxpeftacion  of  the  former 
proniifes  to  be  performed  by  them. 

A  Voice  faid,  likewife,  to  him,  that  A.  L.  fhould  not  go  to  the  Emperours  Court,  for  lack 
6f money  :  for  hf  lliould  get  none  here.  Likewife,  ic  willed  him  to  go  up  iiuo  his  Study 
and  he  would  fliew  him  all  thettfeft  of  our  Inftruftions  received.  E.  K-  complained  to  me 
how  he  was  thus  grcivoufly  molefted  by  fuch  means^and  almoft  brought  in  defpair.  But  I  com- 
forted him  as  well  as  1  could  (  my  felf  being  inwardly,  moft  forrowful  }  and  made  my  moane 
to  God  by  prayer  when  I  was  alone  :  for  him,  and  our  Caufe.  Moreover  he  could  not  be 
^crfwaded  by  me  that  ^ood  Angels  would  undertake  to  help  u;  zo  any  relief  by  money  or  trea- 
fiirc  :  affirming  that  it  appertained  to  the  vviclced  ones :  feeing  they  were  th&  Lords  of  this 
World  ;  and  thekin.'^domof  God  was  not  of  this  World,©"!;.  ....  Said,thac  tlie  wicked  were 
ili'ttie  world,  and  of  the  world  ;  but  the  Eleftwere  in  the  world,  but  not  of  the  jyorli. 

Side  Mtmdo  effeth,M-ndii6  quod fuum  eji diligeret :  quiaverode  mundo  non   ejlls  fed  e£(jelegi  foan.cap.i^.C 
V(ts)iemundo,profttreA  odit  vos  MunduS'  '"  ^' 

Ergo  dedi  eit  femtonem  tuum,  &  mimdus  eos  odio  habuit,  quia  non  funt  de  rnun^Lo,  ft'cii^ &  ego  x„  ^^j  ,4  Q:'-,- 
nonfktH  de  wndo.  Non  tigo  ut  tollas  eos  de  mundo,  fed  ut  ferves  eos  ^  malo.   Ve  mundo  non  funt  :  V   *  , 

ficut  &  ego  HonfufK  de  mundo,  &c.  ^  ^^  ^^^w 

To  be  of  the  world,  was  to  be  in  love  with  the  trade  of  the  vanities  of  this  wortS,    ancfto 
follow  them:     And  that  money  and  riches  were  things  iiidilfe  rent  :  good,  if  chey  were  well  wilvM  sri'i* 

uf^ed  ;  and  evil,  if  they  were  evilly  ufed  :    And  that,  Bonif  omnia   cooperabantvr  ad  honum  ; 
Therefore  the  godly  (  as  the  Patriarchs  and  many  now  adayes  )  might  have  moneys  but  to 
I  ufe,  not  abufc  ic  :  and  that  fuch  is  our  cafe  and  neceflary  requelt  to  God,  &c.  -^'^  "*^ 

Sunday,  Cracovi£,  Junii  24.  i  Meridie  htram  cirriter  tertiam.        "^       *    ' 
A.   Note,  xvhile  at  my  lodging  (  by  Saint  5ffp/;fw)  I  was  writing  the  Note,  (dnfh'ep^Ve  anitl»ior, 

going  next  before  )  of  the  Tentations  of  Friday  and  Saterday  :  E.  K.   was  at  my  Lord  A.  L.'H 
his  lodging  (  at  the  Francifcan  Fryars,  where  he  lay  at  Phylick  )  and  At  the  fame'tinie  ^  this 
.happened,  as  followeth  j  -  ' 

iiiSiiToy  Lord  y^.  L-andE.  K-  fate  together,  conferring  and  confulting  of  dUr  alFat'i's ,  of 
Gods  mercies,  and  of  (undry  tentacions  of  the  fpiritual  enemy,  and  afterward,  as  the  Lord 
A.  JL.  was  reading  Kofenfn  pfalm,  de  Fiducia  in  Veuni^  fuddenly,  upon  £.  K.  his  right  fhouider, 

did 


17 1       ^  ^rue  "^'l alien  of  D^.  Dee  his  JBions  f^ith  Jpirits,  &c. 

did  a  heavy  tiling  fcem  to  fit,  or  rcft,whercof  he  told  the  Lord  J.  L.  And  afterward  was  this 
voyce  littered  by  that  Creauire  in  Lutine. 

Lasky^veytiet  tewpui^  cum  tu  prtahit  vcrfumfedecintumy  illiiis     Tfalnti  uniecimi^  in  vexUU  tuo^ 
&■  vin^es  inimicos  tuos. 

Then  A.  L  f  .ught  in  Davids  Pfaker  for   the  eleventh  Pfalni,  and  fixceenth  vcrfc  thereof.- 
and  while  he  Avas  fo  about  that  Pfalm,  The  voyce  faid  that  he  meant  not  that  Pfalm  of  Da- 
Tid,  but  the  eleventh  Pfalm  of  Reffenfn  :  which  Pfalm   the  Lord  A.  L-  was  then  in  reading  to 
E.  K.  and  was  about  the  verfe.  Hie  labor  ac  dolor,  8ic.  being  the  fixth  verffi. 
By  and  by  after,  the  voyce  faid  in  EngUJh. 

— Truftthou  in  God. 

Hereupon  the  Lord  A.  L.    did  read  forth  that  Pfalm  of  Rcjf.M/?j,  and  when  he  came  tothe 

fixtecnth  veife  thereof,  being 

Si  amhulavno  in  wedii  tribulatioxif,  wt  cnHodies  aJvnfiu  inimicos  tu  .  .  . 

Maniim  tunrn  extendes,&-  dexter  a.  tua  me  fahnbit.  , 

Thereupon  the  voyce  faid  :  Put  tothe  firftline  of  the  next  verfe:  And  thit  was  TDminetu] 
omnia  pro  me  perficies.  ■  j 

And  as  he  would  have  read  further,  the  voyce  willed  him  to  (lay  acthofe  words,  and  faid 
as  foUoiveth  : 

^.^^  ^^^^  —^ J  fwear  unto  thee  by  the  true  and  living  God,  that  this  fhall  come  to  pafTe.  * 

158?.  Jun"         Then  E.  K.  faid  unto  the  Creature  :  In  the  name  of  God,  Who  art  tbou  ?  And  he  «i- 
II  Cricovis.    fevered  in  Latins,  and  faid  , 

'S.go  Sum  AVE,  eras  plum  aidieti^.  , 

u.  Gloria,  laus,  honor  &  gratiarum  aftio  perenni*  fit  Deo  Noftro,  omnipotenti 
&  Mifericordi.    Amen. 


Munday  25.  J««/i,  Mane  kora  7.        Cracovias. 

It 

L    Orationew  Dotninicam  pronmci/ivimus,  &  abquot  tiliK  oratitmcultK  ex  Pf/tlmU  ,  Sec.     Aftet 

we  had  fit  awhile  together  conferring  of  ^j/ff  his  Vifion,  d^c. 

Ave.  A  voyce  faid,  brinfr  up  the  fljefv-jione.  _  _  1 

A.  I   had  fet  it  down  on  the  Table,  behinde  the  Cufhion  with  the  CrofTes,  fori  had  fur-' 

nifted  the  Table  with  the  Cloath,  Candles,  &c.  as  of  late  I  was  wont :  Hereupon  I  fet  uf  the 

ftoneontheCulhion.  _  ': 

E.  K.  There  appeareth  in  the  Jftone,  like  a  white  Curtain  all  over 
the  ftone  :  After  awhile  it  was  drawn,  and  layed  on  the  back-fide  of  the 
ftone,  on  a  heap  together. 
i^.'^f^  Now  here  ftandeth  one  in  a  white  Garment ,  with  a  white  Cerclec 

about  his  head  like  a  white  fmock,  I  remember  not  that  ever  I  faw  this 
Creature  before,  his  Garment  is  tucked  up. 

£k.  Ave.  Wh  u  he  that  is  rich  ? 

A.  The  Lord  of  all, 

He  it  is  that  apeneth  the  t  fiore-houfes^  HOtfuch  us  fy  away  rfith  the  winder  but  fuch  at  are 

°    '  pure,  and  without  end. 

A.  Blefled  be  his  name  for  ever.  /, 

To  the  pure  in  fpirit,  and  fuch  ashe  delighteth  in.   Amen. 

va  verlum     Vixit  Vominus  t  Invoca.  mmen  wfKw,  &  mittam  vobis  verbum  quo  fabricavi  terram,  &  rf' 
tu'um  in  ore     fponfum  dabit  de  fe  ■,  &  teftimonium  dabit  de  /V,  Jtt  in  tejiintonio  vincat  malos. 

me,ifyfapien.      £    j^^  Now  is  thctc  firc  come  ,  and  hath  confumed  this  Creature  all 

tiain  tl^.^"l  m  .       r  t  n 

c,-Ji  meo       jQ  pieces,  and  he  is  fall'n  down  to  aihes. 


^unfi  h'-      Now  he  rifeth  up,  and  he  is  brighter  then  he  rvas  before. 


r*  dt  lena  ie-      ,,  ^,    So  doth  the  glory  of  God  comfort  the  jujl ,    and    they  rife    again  with    a.    threrfeli' 

A.   A  place  was  made. 

E.  K.  Now  he  fpreadeth  the  airc,or  openeth  it  before  him  ,  andl 
there  appeareth  before  him  a  fquare  Table.  -0 

Now" 


A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  ABions  mth  fpirits,  6c c,      1 7  5 


Now  he  taketh  off  the  Table  a  black  Carpet. 


(., 


t 


The  Tabic  of 

Now  he  taketh  oft  a  green  Carper.  ^^^  ^"ch. 

Now  he  taketh  off  a  white  Carpet.  jL  ^  He  wketh 

Now  lie  taketh  otF  a  red  Cloath.  red  cioathsin 

And  now  the  Table  appcareth  to  be  made  of  earth,  as  Potters  Clay,  fpTai^p'thr* 

Very  raw  earth.  chy^S"'^ 

E.   K.  The  Table  hath  four  feet,  of  which  two  touch  the  ground, 

and  two  do  not :  The  feet  feem  alfo  to  be  of  the  earth.   The  Table  is 

Tquare. 

E.  it .   On  the  left  corner  (^farthefi:  from  £.  K.)  did  a  T  appear  on 

the  Table  :  Out  of  the  top  of  this  T  do  four  beams  iifue  of  clear 

collour  bright. 

\,  ......  Ihat  part  [pointing  to  that  T]  of  the  Table  of  the  earth  of  thofe  that  govern  the  earth: 

that  if  are  governed  by  the  feven  Angels  that  are  governed  by  the  [even  that  ji and  before  God,that 
are  governed  hj  the  living  God,  which  ii  found  in  the  Seal  of  the  living  god  ,  ("Tan  with  the  four') 
which  fignifie  t^e  forir  forcers  of  God  princplal  i«  e«rt^,&:c. 

".*...■..  ^iove  not,  for  the  place  it  hylj,  and  became  half. 

J  [aid  not  fe  ,  he  [aid  it  j  that  beareth  witneffc  of  himfelf,  Vnto  thiiiobey  the  ttker  three 

Angels  of  the  table. 

"  E.K".  On  the  other  farther  corner  of  the  Table  (on  E.  K.  his  right 
hand  J)  is  a  Croffe  like  an  Alphabet  Croffe. 

This  Croffe,  and  the  other  T  do  feem  to  lye  upon  the  Table,in  a  dim 
dunniih,or  a  sky  colour.  All  the  Table  over  feemeth  to  be  Icriblcd  and 
qifed  with  new  lines. 

The  earth  it  the  lafi ,  which  is  with  the  Angels,  but  not  at  the  Angels,  and  therefore  itfland-  ^^^  Earth, 

ethinthe  Table  of  the  feven  ^//^e/^, -^  which  ftand  before  thepiefence  of  God  in  the  laft  place,'*''''*  ^'?.*' 
mtbOttt  A  Letter,  or  number,  but  figured  by  a  Croffe.  -°'  ^'*'''"' 

;  ,  It  if  expreffed  in  the  Angle  of  that  Table,  wherein  the  names  of  the  Angels  are  gathered,     '  "' 

and  do  appear,  ai  of  Michael  and  Gabriel. 

A.  I  remember,  there  is  an  Alphabetary  CrofTe. 

E.K.  Now  in  the  corner  of  the  Tabic,  on  the  right  hand  to  E.K. 
appeareth  another  Cro{fe,fomewhat  on  this  faOiion  +.  and  there  appeafd 
jhefc  Letters  and  Numbers* 

i.         b  16  Vidilib.  ?. 

__l_^  itinolySi. 

'~l,  AprilisiB, 

...:..  It  if  in  that  Table,  ffhich  confjieih  of  4.  and  8. 

''E.K.  In  the  laft  corner  of  this  earthly  Table  appeareth   a  little 
round  fmo!{ey2iS  big  as  a  pins  head. 

E.  K.  Now  is  all  covered  with  a  mift. 

E.  K.  Now  I  hear  a  great  voyce  of  thumbling  and  rumbling  in  the 
i|one. 

E.K.  Now  all  waxeth  clear  again. 

Now  hoveringly  over  the  Table  ,  appear  infinite  fort  of  things  like 
l^rms,  fonijetimes  going  up  and  fometimes  down  i  thefe  feem  fomewhat 
brightifh. 

Over  thefe  higher  in  the  aire,  appear  an  infinite  fort  of  fmall,  little, 
blackifh  things,  bigger  then  Motes  in  the  Sun,  and  they  go  up  and 
down,  and  fometime  come  among  thofe  worm-liks  Creatures, 

2  \..,.Thc 


I 


174      ^  true^elation  of  D^,  Dee  his  JBions  mth/pirits,  &c. 


.  "fkf  L«rd  appeared  unto  Enoch,  and  was  mercifull  unto  him,opeHed  hit  eyes,that  ht  might 

fee  and  judge  the  earth,  yvhich  was  mknovn  unto  his  Parents ,  hy  reafett  of  their  fail :  far  the  Ltri 
far  J,  Let  mjhew  unto  Enoch,  the  ufe  of  the  earth  :  And  /o,  Enoch  was  wife  ,  and  full  tf  the  fpi- 
tit  of  wjfdenr, 

Jndoe  ftiyed  unto  the  Lord , Let  there  be  remembrance  of  thy  mercy^  and  let  tbefe  that  love  thee 
tajie  of  thii  after  me  :  0  let  not  thy  mercy  be  forgttten.   And  the  Lord  was  fleafed. 
P,  And  after  50.  dajes  Enoch  had  writtat :  and  thit  was  the  Title  of  his  beokj  ,  let  thofe  that  fear 

f  o.     »y«'       g^^^  ^^^^  ^j,^  worthy  read. 

Thetitleof         But  behold;,  the  people  waxed  wickfd,  and  became  unrigkeouiy  and  the  fpirit  of  the  Lordwat  far 

EnocAiboo'ts,    g^^  „yi^  g„yfe  ^xfay  from  them.  So  that  thofe  that  were  unworthy  began  to  read.   And  the  Kings  of 

expoundca  in-  ^y^^  ^^^^^  |-^ -^  ^^^^^  ggainfl  the  Lord^What  is  it  that  we  cannot  do  ?   Or  who  is  he^  that  can  refijt  us  ? 

?  ^  u'oll's'or    Ay<.d  the  Lord  was  vexed,  and  hefent  in  amongfi  them  an  hundred  and  fifty  Lions ,  and  fpirits  of 

wid!ta°fi.irii5  wickedneUe, fnoKr,  and  deceit  :  and  they  appeared  unto  them:  For  the  Lsrd  had  put  them  be' 

feducers.  twecJi  thofe  that  arewicksd,  and  his  good  Angels ;  And  they  began  to  counterfeit  the  doings  of 

*.  oiinuifc:t     ^-qJ  a,i  j  |,is  power,  for  they  had  power  given  them  fo  to  do,  fo  that  tht  memory  tf  Enoch  wajhed 

'"^*  array :  and  the  fpirits  tf  err  our  began  to  teach  them  VoUrines :  which  from  time  to  time  unto   this 

age,  and  unto  this  day,  hathfpread  abroad  tnto  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  is  the  skjU  and  cimning 

of  the  wickfd. 

.  -  Hereby  theyfpeak.  with  the  "Devils  :  not  becaufe  they  have  power  over  the  Devils  ,  hut  becaufe  tbej 

BicUns      *'    are  ]oyHed  unto  them  in  the  league  and  Difcipline  of  their  own  DoSrme. 

For  behold,  as  the  kjtowledge  of  the  mylltcal  figures,  and  the  ufe  of  their  frefence  is  the  gift  ef^. 
God  delivered  to  Enoch  j  and  by  Enoch  his  regueji  to  the  faithfull,  that  thereby  they  might  have  the 
true  ufe  of  Gods  creatures,  &  of  the  earth  whereon  they  dwell:  So  hath  theDevil delivered unt$ 
the  wicksd  theft':ns,and  tekjts  of  his  error  and  hatred  towardt  God:  whereby  they  in  ufing  them, 
might  confent  with  their  fall :  andfo  become  partskjrs  with  them  of  their  reward fWhich  is  eternal 
damnation. 

7hefe  they  call  CharaUers  :  a  lamentable  thing.     For  by  tbefe,  many  Souls  have 

Devils  Chi-  periflied. 

rafters.  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  pleafed  God  td  deliver  this  bo£trine  again  out  of  dark^effe :  and  to  fulfill  hia 

The  mercy  o(  promifc  with  thee,  for  the  books  of  Fnorh  :  To  whom  hefayetb  as  he  faid  unto  Enoch- 
God  to  Die.        j^gj.  jhofe  tfiat  jj-g  worthy  underftadd  this,  by  thee,  that  it  may  be  one  witnejfe  of  my  promife 
T°^-  toward  thee. 

Come  therefore,  0  thou  Cloud,  and  wretched  darkjte^e,  Come  firth  I  fay  out  of  this  Table  :  for 
The  wicked     the  Lsrd  again  hath  opened  the  earth  :  and  Jhejhall  become  known  to  the  worthy. 

icdoutoAhe      E.  K.    Now  Cometh  out  of  the  Table  a  dark  fmoke  ,  and  there  re- 
""**■         maincth  on  the  Table  a  goldiHi  (lime  :  and  the  things  which  hovered  in 

the  aire  do  now  come,  and  light  down  on  that  (lime,  and  fo  mount   up 

again. 

He  faid Non  omnibus  fed  bonis. 

E.  K.  He  taketh  the  fmoke  and  tieth  it  up. 

I  tie  her  not  up  from  all  men,  but  from  the  good. 

Now  Cometh  a  dark  Cloud  over  all  again. 

A.     A  paufe. 

E.  K.  Now  it  is  bright  again. 

He  faid Fiant  nnnia  facillima, 

Number. 


£.  K.  I 


^^tme  ^(ehtkn.ofTy ,  Dee  h\s  J&icnsmth  fpirits,  d<:c.    ■     i-rf 


• 'S'fi.'^K-  I  fee  lines  ani  fcribblements   fas  before)  eoine  athwarf  the 
£.  If.  I  count  thirteen  lines  downward.  • 

«9dl>«u;%'.  Siaythfre. 

E'  K'  I  count  twelve  this  way  ovcrthwarf. 


►■.'^    s». 


JMM-^ 


,1*    «1 


•   IT  it. 


« 

•I- 

JjU'v 

1%" 

J1    * 

^Hf)^ 

«.»5 

k:, 

■-;  ^ 

so  -■ 

- 

:y.,r,... 


Ijfi- 


;,..£.  /f.  In  the  ]un  middle  or  every  fquire  are  little  pricks.  The  Table 
feemcth  to  be  eighth  yards  fquare. 

E.  K.   Now  come  upon  thefe  fquares  lik.e  Chara^ers.     They  be   note. 

the.  true  Images  of  Codhis  fpiritnalCreature.f,     '  >    •^•»/-  ar    ew.- 

-.-.^.P.JFrife  what  thou  feejL 

E?K.   I  cannot.       -  -• 

•«;V/ A.  Endeavour  to  do  your  beft  ^  for  he  that  biddeth  you  do,  will  alfo  give  you  power 
■  ;to  do. 

E.K.   Didhisbeft,  at  length  fire  flafhed  in  his  face,  and  (hortly  af-  ^'- 

iterhcfaid,  I  perceive  they  beeafie  to  make,  fo  that  I  tell  the  fquares, 

'  By  which  the  lines  do  pafle,and  draw  from  middle  prick  to   middle 

prick.  /  "'";j      ■:-^-^- 

A.  At  length  E.K.  finiflied  thttMiihirziSYYtzt'iiiiCe  feemedto  be  yellovvifh  Geld. 
E.  K.  You  heard  one  here  fay,  1  ivritemy  own  damnation. 

He  7)i/ghc  have  [aid, you  write  his  damnation.     Praj^and  write  as  many  more  IinS!'  '"^ 

A.  After  awhile  E.  if,  did  with  great  eafe  finifhthe  four  parts  of  the  Table. 

E.K.  The  jftone  is  become  dark. 

A  voyce,  .,,.  Ceafe  for  an  hour, 

A.   May  we  pafle  from  our  places  as  now  ? 

4.    1- 

A.    After  a  little  hour  paft  we  returned,  and  as  we  talked  of  the  premifTes,  he  faid, 

L'feno  time- 

A.  He  faid  in  the  ftone  being  cleat  again, 

......  In  the  ndnie  of  Gody  be  diligent^  and  wove  mt  f»r  the  place  is  holy. 

X..Ji  tirks  the  firjifquare:  mite  jfom  the  left  hand  towardthe  rights  you  Jhall  ^r/t^  fmalllet- 
ters  and  great. 
,  Sey  wbityoufee  [to  E,  /C.] 

r  Z  1  1  a  f  A  u   t  1  p  a. 

A.  1  finde  here  one  fquare  among  thefe  Charafters  that  hath  nothing  in  it. 

z  2 if 


A  wicked 
power  terapCf 
ing  E.K. 


S7  <5       ^  true  %elation  of  T>\  Dee  his  Mions  mthffirits,  &c. 


[....,.  It  muji  he  filled. 
ardZaidpaLam. 


E.  K.  A  dim  Cloud  cometh  before  mine  eyes ;  now  it  is  gone. 

cZonsavoYaub 
ToiTtXoPacoC 
Sigasomrbz   nh 
fmondaTdiari 
oroIbAhaoZpi 

CnabrVixgazd 
Oil  itTpalOai 
AbamoooaCvca 
NaocOTtnpraT 
Ocanmagotroi 
Shialrapmzox 

E.  K.  Now  Cometh  a  Cloud  over. 

Take  the  fecond^that  is  the  third  that  was  written. 

This  pmay 

ftjnd  back-  bOaZaR   o    phaR   a 

war.1,  or  for-  '  u  N  n  a  X    o    P  S  o    n  d   H 

"K^Wimis  a     i   g   r  an    o    o   ma   g.g 

there.fonof  o    r    p  m  n  1    n    g  b  c    a    1 

thstdivcrfe  rsOnizirlemu 

fettinf?  izinrCziaMhl 

—  For  bfgin-  niordialhCtGa 

ningthcfcic  ^Ocanchiasom 

*""  ""^^^  '•»=  A  r   b    i  z  m   i  i   1    p    i   z 

name  of  a  ,-«  i  o  t 

wicked fpiiit.  Opana    lamSmaL 

dOIopinianb*  , 

r    X  p    a  o  c_s    i  z     i    x  p 
axtirVast    rim 

f-mc°o'rtt       .':-,rh^tlaftmrdUVaMm.  .    .  ,  ' 

fiftdtvifionof     A.  I  marvel  of  that  fquare  that  lacketh  this  line. 

theij'aire?         It  miji  be  drawn  fom  the  eni^  or  foot  to  thtt  fricKt^^f ore  sphere  it  comth  doubhle  fhffi 

A  voyce  to     the  firji  top,  the  frick^is  allowed  hut  to  one^  and  not  twice  to  be  accounted :  So  that,  that  jlandetkJptft 
this  intent,  -affix  frickj  :  "therefore  it  mitj}  be  fr  anted  y  and  «o»  it  ii  of  fevett. 

E.K.  Ail  is  in  a  Cloud. 
Now  all  is  clear  again. 

donpaTdanVa..' 
This  is  the  Table  thn     oloaGe    oob    a..i 
hath  4.   and  D  on  the      o  P  a  HI  n  O  O  G  m   d  n  m 
top.bymefonoced.  aplsTedecaop 

semi    oonAml    ox 

VarsGdLbri    ap 

oiPte    a   apdo    ce 

psuac   n  rZ   irZa 

Siodaoiurzfm  4 

_,    ,,r        .daltTdnadire 

P  backward,.,  or  forward-     j   -  -  ^ 

^isarfward.  1 '  ^"^  "'  ^  !?   '   *    °  *,  ? 

Oo  Dp  z    1  A  p  a  n    1  1     • 

r  g  o  a  11  n  Q^A  C  r  a  r 


E.  K.  Now 


I 


A  tm  'Relation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  fpirits,  <5cc,      177 

E.  K.  Now  he  calleth  again,  faying,    Sec.  -% 

A.  This  is  the  Table  that  had 
the  Ilrde  round  fmoke.  TaOAduptDnIm 

A.  No,  it  was  the  Tabic  before.  aabcooromebb 

TogconxmalGm 

nhodDialeaoc 

p    a  c    Ax    i  o  V  s  P    s  yl 

Saa    i    xaarVroi 

ni  p  h    a  r   s  1    g  a    i  o    1 

MamgloinLirx 

olaaDagaTapa 

paLcoidxPacn 
•  rjdazNxiVaasa 

iidPonsdaspi 

xriihcarndij 

E.  K.  Now  all  is  in  a  whitifh  cloud  covered. 
.    E.K.  Nowdl  is  clear. 

,. :.«.  Ma]{e  the  firft  figure  upon  a  clean  ^n^er,  and  thereto  aide  the  fintple  letters  :  Then  (hall 
j»u  hear  more.  Tlou  ntuji  mal^e  the  fquarA  of  the  firji  part  of  the  'table  unto  every  fquare  and  his 
letters. 

A.    I  have  made  the  fquares  of  the  firft  part,  and  fet  in  the  letters. 

'thouhail  in  the  miUle  line  o  r  o  it)  A  h  a  o  z  pi.         there  are    6  lines  ahove^  mtd  fix  he^ 

low.     that  line  it  calledlmenSpnkus  Szndii  :    and  out  of  that  line  cometb  the  three  tumes  of  Lhea  SfiritUi 

C»d,  fromthe  Eaji  gate,  being  of  3,4,  ands-  letters,  which  were  the  armesofthe  Enfignes  that  SanSi. 

were  (token  of  before. t  Oro,  ibah,  aozpi  j  I  [aid  before^  that  God   the  Father  &  mighty  pillar  Onm. 
...  U I^  .  ,^     '  ■   \     \-  "     '  i  -T-u.  3  names 

I  divided  with  a  right  line.  ^^"^^Jj  ,^  B^^. 

the  Father  himfelf,  without  the  line.  aers. 

the  Father  and  Son  by  addition  of  the  line. 

tbefe  two  lines  beginning        J  A  ^■ 

i  d 
r  •    a    r 

that  if  the  great  Crojfe  that  came  out  of  the  Eafigate.  Bait. 

^    A.   With  that  line  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  ? 

I. 

thou  hafi  in  the  upper  left  angle  in  the  fecond  line    a  r  d  z  a. 

thou  hall  that  tHa\eth  the  crojfe  downward  :  firji  i,  then  the  fame  d,  o,  ij  g  o. 
-■    A.  Will  you  have  fix  letters  downward  ? 

1. 

"^    So  thou  hafi  the  three  other  croffes  in  their  angles. 

A.  Will  you  give  m:  leave  to  repeat  them,  for  fear  of  erring  ? 

IL  a  c  z  a,  the  down  line  of  fix  letters,  and  p  a  L  a  ni  the  erofle  line, 

It  is  fo.  .  , 

f^.  Now  to  the  other  on  the  left  fide  belov*^. 


o 
a 
i 


a 

i  * 


,     the  down  right  line.        Now  the  crofle  line,is  O  i  i  I  t.  Ten  fares  on 

.   Here  thofe  CrofTes  have  ten  faces.  the  Crofles. 

,;    A.  One  letter  is  reckoned  twice  which  is  in  the  center  cf  the  CrofTe  :   and  fo  fliould  feem 
t©  be  eleven. 

,  ..■!..,  thii 


r?  t5"     A  true^eidtion  ofJD\  Dee  his  JBions  mthjpirits,  6cc, 


;■..-.—.  Thii-it  tmekjiowledge. 

v£ft;  JJlC  iallcroifcis  thus,  his  down  line  ii' '3$'^ 


u 

r 
r 
z 
,  L.  -The  Crofl>  is  a.L  O  a  i. 


I 


* '^'^a'. '^d'  h'aVeTt'h'd  4"dr6nes  attendant  on  the  principal  CrofTe.  ,, .-iy^^'* 

Hi^re  thou  mAjftfee  the  caiife-,  that  Pilac  wrote  with  4  letters.  :  l/<     % 

A.   Hjw  doth  the  caufe  appear  ? 

......  For  aloie  c^crj  crcffe^jitindetb  ^  letters -.'Not    t^/zt  Pilat  knew  ity   htit  that  itwtuthi 

'f(>fe~^^e'rmnatjO)Lof  God.  '  11 

■  '^fiff\ii'ethiutihe  read.  In  the  upper  left  angle  thou  haft  rzl  a  ;  pronoftnce,  urzia  .:^ 
£\.  Another  ^^■^fy^f^\  thf  firft'Afizel  appeareth.  z  1  a  ;  go  then  to  the  firft  r,  and  pronounce  it  zlar.  that'tm 
pronoun     g^   ^^^^  ^^  ^  ^^^^^^  ^^-  ^j,^  ^^^j.  ^^gf.r^  ^  j^^  /^jf  /^jj.^^  ^j  t^^  pco^^/  :  ,«  o\  the  firft  r,  W/ri  t6e  firii  let^ 

The  4  An?cls  ter  of  the  name,  as  r  z\  a,  that  rismw  the  lafi  letter  of  the  namf  of  ihe  fecond  AngelybeginnittQ 
over    every       at  Z,  <?i  Z  !  a,  and  foba'c\  agah'  to  ther.  ,  -  _. 

croff.- of  the 4,  ^  s^„  ^[,3^  the  third  beginneth  at./,  whofelaft  letter  is  the  firft  of  thq  fecond  name,  and 
crofl"  s''"'        isjCalled  Larz,  and  fo  of  the  laft  :  as^  r  z  /,  to  be  pronounced  arzfl. 

A.  So  that  you  have,of  thole  4  letters,  4  Angels  names,here  thus  gathered  out;but  how;  are 
LTi,^',.c     thcyto  beufed.^?ii5iU  <  '• 

-'  0  3003  in-         ^^^  ''^^  lnjficient  that  jou  kjiow  tbefe  names.     1  will  teach  you  to  life  tbetn. 

4  /Ineclsover  ^'  Shall  we  labour  by  like  order  of  every  the  4  letters  over  the  crofles  toinake4fudi 
V^V^?-  s names?  ,.      ,        j  '         - 

jae  >b;..  ^.   I  do  know  afTuredly  that  there  is  very  much  matter  in  this  Table. 

Fn  ^^ iir-'*'  '       ^^  "  ^^"^  '  ^'"'  ^^^^^^^Oj  ftretched  the  knowledge  of  Solomon.      nl  Vv  '.'»•  '    .  i. 

^^£Ai^4  Non?  for  jo;ir  fix  Seniors :  whofe  judgement  it  of  God  the  Father  ^  thi.Son^.and  the  Holy 

' "    GholE.  In  the  line  De  Sp\t\tuSah8to,  you  have  Ab'ioroof  fix  htters-.lhe  fecond  name  of  the^eceitiii 
'  ,.:  X-        .Senior  i/  of  7.  <?^3  A  {the  fame^  afcending  )  Aaixa  if  the  third^  as  the  fecond^  in  patre  Scfilio^' 

Hcwor'/A. 
^^  y42;.?i« /«  Fpirita  Sanfto,  i&a<$«;)/.     the  fifth,  ;«  patre' &  filio  defcendens  j&i  /laf  24.-^  j';;,^ 

tVie"senio7s'  ol-^^^^'  A  V  to  Tar.  7f  jo7<  wi//  maks  them  ofj  letters  (  becaufe  two  of  tbem,  are  lijit  of  fix  Jtthac 
7.!ctters.         IS,  v.hen  thevivzxhoi  God.  is  to  hijencreafed.  '  ' 

Note. 

Theenere.if;n^  ■  X^^"/ i^/^^^'^'^f  JO/^AJj  AbiorOj/rfjv  Habioro  ;  and  where  you  fay  Haozpi,p^  ahahozpi.  "j;^;,* 
of  n  inies  with  had  haofpi,  before  h  «  A  ;  tak^e  that  unto  it  and  it  mak^eth  Aha  ozpi.  And  fo  they  confii  elL  of 
a  i«r,^r  ^  letters.  -'•  •  •*  ■' 

thou  hai}  b  the  fifth,  in  the  left  part  of  the  line,  de  Spiritu  Sanfto  ;   thou  h-rff  a  the  flxh.^^'iit' 
firft  part  of  the  line  de  patre  &  fijio  ' defcending.  )  T  the  fixth   in  the  fecond  part  dtfcend- 
'--.    a  The  firft  in  the  fecond  part  defcending,  or  the  fecond  afcending, 
Thm  h.tft  a  the  fifth,  in  zozp'i.  .,.,.. 

iT'^efxth,  and  Y, the  fixth,  afcending  in  the  p4rt  defcending  of  the  line  <Je  patre  8c  filio,  t(&* 
AorH     f^'^^'f"'^'^fi'^'^f''^^--'^'*^'^^^<>rthe\itbatt}ind  in  the   Center,  to  it:  7hou  /&<z/f  Bataiva  or 
•  To  •'•ske  th-  ^"^'^'''^-      ^"'^  ^'"'fi  ^"V  ^'«f  *  one  of  them,  either  the  A  or  the  h.      A,  comiter,  and  fa  in  e'Stre- 
enlof  this    ■  ffii^  j^ldintS.  ,  ^ 

wora.  "^:'St>-I  fee  when  the  cf>ntraa  ^,  and  when  the  rontrtft/f  muft  end  this  word":  "3*hat 

The  King  his  is  the  mighty  Prince  whofe  traine  was  holden  up  in  the  Eaft. 
name  F.aih 

To  moiTow.         ..■•'•  Spare  we  now,  I  will  Open  yoM  more  fecrets  to  morrow,  I  am  fecretly  called  away,   but 
you  (hall  find  me  the  truefervant  of  God. 

E.  K.    Now  he  fpreadeth  the  white  Curtain  over  all  that  was  Jaid 
on  an  heap  behind.  • 

Chataaers   ot       let  one  thing  ere  I  go.      Thofe  Characters  or  Notes  (  for,  fo  call  them  )  are  the  parts  of 

^Tf  ,>■  ae  "^'^5  ^'^'^  Earth,  as  you  may  find  in  thofe  names  *  I  delivered yop  before  ;  To  the  intent  you  niav 
livcKd  them',  '^°^^  ^''  ^^^  ^V°'  ''^  over  at  one  time.        Now,  my  Iqve  reft  with  you. 

but   by    the  E.    K.     NoW  he  is  gOnC.  „  -      .'.      ':'  '■       ' 

nnK.  fp.at  of    ^,^  <i&v,.AmorT)ri  patris filii  8c  Spiritus  Sanfti  fit  fuper  nos. "    Amen.  Sfemper. 

Note.  ^  ^-      ' 

, sd  xstlT ,A ibulw^lioal «3d  C3 itiov. \,^^}  %n'W  ^^V-^  -*^  "        "  ^^.^i^^^isi 

'iVlTo'i   T.      -u     ...  rucCday,Junii26.Mamhora2.  .      ,, 

->^o7anirT«^Sf-''i'^  -"i"!'  ^l"*^  variasnoftrasconfiderationes  de  prj millls,tandf m  apparutc  4  ^1;, 
.l.J.»7?'J|.^''".'^iPf"«S^.ABt'^^iicutcrat,.^       ..^w,«.  *^  '  ^^      .. -d-.^ 


A  true  delation  of\y.  Dee  his  ABions  mthfpirits,  dec,       179 


£.  K.  He  hath  gathered  the  whole  Curtain  together  as  ycfterday, 
and  fet  it  behind.  Now  a  white  mift  cometh  over  all,  Now  the  mift 
is  gone. 

Ave All  glory  a^dpraife,  he  to  God  the  Father^  the  Son  and  Holy  Gboji. 

t,.  Amen. 
Ave.  ......  Now  to  the  piirpofe  :     Refi,  for  the  place  is  holy.     Firfi,  generally  what  thlsTabls 

I  tontaineth- 

1.  Alllnimane  knowledge. 

2,  Out  of  it  fpringeth  Phyfick.  The  general  of 
i        3.   The  kpoffledge  of  all  elemental  Creatures^amoHgd  you.     Hon' w«»jf  kindes  there  are,  and  *''^^ 

for  what  nfe  they  were  created.  Ihofe  that  live  in  the  air,  by  themfelves.  Thofe  that  live  in  the 
waters^  by  themselves.  Thofe  that  dwell  in  the  earthy  by  themfelves.  The  property  of  the  fire  ; 
which  is  the  fecrec  life  of  all  things, 

^.Thek^owledgtiindinganduic  oi  Metals.     ^ 

The  vertues  of  them.  >     They  are  all  of  one  matter* 

The  conjrelations,  and  vertues  of  Stones.     \ 

5.  The  Conjoyning  and  knitting  together  of  Natures.    The  dejirticiion  of  Nature ,  and  of  thinp 
that  may  per  iff}. 

6.  Moving  from  place  to  place,  f  as,  into  thi*  Country,  or  that  Country  at  pleajure.  1  .  i.  j-t ,  «„j  . 

7.  The  KnoMge  of  all  crafts  Mechanical  fruc  S 

8.  Tranfmutatio  formahs,  fed  non  eUcntialig.  % 

E.  K.  Now  a  white  mift  CO vereth  him.  A.  The  ninth 

A. Paufc  for  a  i  of  • ■  Sdedfand 

E.  K.  Now  he  appeareth  again  Sit' w 

Look,  out  Lexarph,  with  the  two  other  that  ftllow  him,  among  the  names  of  the  Earth  the  'H^ '  whereof 

three  laft.  SrVabler"' 

Lexarph,  Comanan,  Tabitom. 

LooKo"t  the  name  Paraoan.     If^rite  out  Paraoanw  a  void  paper. 
A.  I  have  done. 
SwJ^owf  Lcxarph. 
A.  1  have  found  it. 

Look.intt  the  4  parts  of  the  Table,  and  take  the  letters  that  are  of  the  leafi  CharaHer.      Look, 
tmongthe  4  farts  that  have  the  CharaSers  :  and  Itok,  to  the  CharaSers  that  have  the  leaji  letters. 
A.  I  have  done. 

How  many  letters  are  tbey  ? 

A.  Seven.  « 

; They  mujl  be  eight.  • 

A.  They  are  thefe  (  as  I  have  noted  them  )  O  A  JA  JA  il, 

Ihere  are  8  in  the  4.  A.  Afterwards  I  found  8  letters  in  the  4  principal  : 

for  I  had  omitted  T  I. 
Dwell  in  darkfiejfe  — ■ —  A.  I  fufpeft  this  was  fpokcn  to  me,  to  my  re- 

proof, for  no  more  diligence  ufed  in  the  fearcfa. 


Tbey  mujibe  made  all  one  CharaUer. 


e  X  a  r  p 

h  c  o  n  a 

n  a  n  t  a 

b  i  t  o  m 


Lexarph,  Comanan,  Tabitom. 

Set  down  thtfe  three  names,  leaving  out  the  firfi  L  [  that  it  of  Lexarph,  fet  them  down  by  5.  "J 

Ave Tour  fickjtejfe  caufeth  me  to  be  fick- 

A.  E.  K.  had  the  Migromfore. 
A  great  Temptation  fell  on  E.  K.  :  upon  E.  K.  his  taking  thefc  words  to  be  a  fcofF,  which  ^  f  |,ey  j^  - 
irere  words  of  compaffion  and  fricndfliip,  Bj'mes  of  the 

.         ,  Tenth  »}r,an- 

_ ,    7*f  firfi  is  exarp,  five  in  order.   Set  them  down  without  thefirfi  Table  :    Thatjhall  make  fwering  to  Caf- 

je  crcjfe  that  hindeth  the  4  Angles  of  the  Table  together.     The  fame  that  liretchetbfrom  the  left  to  f'  ^""'.'"''"2 
ight,  muji  dfo  ftretcbfrom  the  right  to  the  left^  ff^^  *"  ^' 

A,  Have"** 


1 8 o       ^J true ^B^lat'wn  of  D'„  Dee  his  Mions  mthjptrits,  &c. 


this  klTsr  Crofle 

Note. 
n»me.  and  doini,  by  aq^fher. 


L,  Have  I  now  made  this  crofle  of  uniting  all  the  4  parts  or  Angels  together,  as  yon 
like  of? 

r. 

Wic' edi4ngels      Every  Hiime.)  founding  of  three  letters.,  beginning  out  of  that  line,  «  the  name  of  a  Devi/j 

whofe  names  or  wickfd  Angel^  at  veil  front  the  right,  as  from  the  /f/t,  excepting  the  [a]  4-.  Angels  that  are 

areof  3  letters. above  the  crojfe,  which  have  no  participation  with  Devils. 

4^  nngeU  a-  -j^j^^  letters  that  joyne  thofe  names,  which  may  be  put  before  the  [  A  4.  ]  names  of  the  four  An- 

tlie  Lffer 'crof- gf  ^^  ^/^'-'^  /""'"  '^roffes  in  every  angle,  (  as  well  from  the  right,   as  the  left,  )  it  the  name  of  Goiy 

fet.  £rg.i,    i6wherebythefe  Angels,  are  C2.\\td.in6.  do  ^\i'^t2ir. 

fuch  in  every       a.   An  example  (  I  pray  you  )  give  of  this  rule. 

of  the  4.pun-       ^    j^  ^fjg  fiyji  J  f^g  jyiack  crops  thou  hxji,  e. 

opal  quarters.         ^^   ^^-^-^ 

Inihe  firjl  fiuare  of  the  right  fide  thouhajl  r.  beginning  the  name  of  the  Angel  \ln\i:  pit  t  to 
it,  and  it  ckangeth  the  found,  into  Erzla.   Erzla/i  the  name  of  God  that  govenieth,  LFrzla.    ' 

A.  And  likevvife  the  other  three  above  the  crofle  are  governed  by  that  nams  of  God, 
Erzla. 

Takj  *  X  which  is  the  next  letter  :  look^under  the  Crrffe  in  the  firjl 

*h\X'"f^°^  ""'°"'  °^    '^"^'^^  '  ^^-'"^  '^'^^^  ^  '''  '^'^"^  °'  '"  ^^^ '^''"Jf^  0  thm  n  s.  Call  it  C  zod- 
ac  cro  e.  en  es  :  It  is  one  of  the  4  amels  that  ferve  to  that  croffe  ,  which  ar^; 

Tlie_  4  Angels  Terving  to    ruled  ij  t/;ii  «^w//ldoigo.  It  ,s  the  name  of  God,  of  fix  letters  :    Look, 

in  the  croffe  that  defcendeth,ln  that  name  [a  Idoigo]  they  appear,  hy  the 

Appearing  by  one    ^^^^^  ^^  ^YA7.3']  that  is  in  the  croffe,  [  A  Tranfverlary  ]  \hej,  do  that 

they  are  commanded. 

A.   Which  they  ?  you  namedonely  C  ao^J^a  f^- 

Ave There  followeth  Tot  t. 

A.  Which  more?  A.    The  principal  CroiTc  tranfverfary. 

thofe  two,  under,  till  yon  come  to  the  Croffe. 
A.  Do  you  mean  .9//7^,  /  wj  «  c/ .'' 

Thofe  4  be  of  Phyfirk, 

A,  As  they  do  tfp/if^r  inthenttme  ofGodiiiji^o,  fo  what  fhall  be  of  the  name  of  God 
Ardza  ? 

Ave The  one  is  to  call  them,  the  other  is  to  command  them. 

If  it  be  an  incurable  difeafe  (  in  the  judgement  of  man  )    then    adde  the  letter  that  flandeth  a.' 
fTheAnacl    gainji  the  n:ime,  and  mal{e  him  j- up  ^ve  :  then  he  cureth  miraculoufly. 
his  name  made        But  if  thou  wHt  fend  fckjieffe,  then  takf  two  of  the  letter  s,and  adde  the  letter  of  the  Croffe  \_h. 
of  five  letters.  ^^^  black.croffe']  to  th.tt,  as  in  the  fecond,  a  To. 
ISd  owm        C  ^'  This  ^,  is  of  the  cro(re  of  union,  or  the  black  crofTc.  ]  » 

Then  he  is  a  wicked  power,  and  bringeth  in  difeafe  :    and  when  thou  called  him,  call  him 

^^^^^^^°^      by  the  name  of  god,  backward  :  for  unto  him,fo,  he  is  a  god  :    and  fo  coiiftraiu  him  backward, 
as  Ogiodi.' 

A.  f  think  the  Conftraint  muft  be,  by  the  name  of  the  Tranfverfary  backward  pronoun- 
ced, as  of  Ardza,  is  back  way,  azdra  :  For  ogiodi,  fhould  but  caufe  him  co  appear  by  the  order 
of  Idoigo,  ufed  for  the  4  good  Angels. 

The  name  of  God  in  the  middeji  of  the  great  Croffe  (  where  the  name  may  have  A  or  H  in 

the  end  )  upon  which  the  4  Crowes  of  the  fir\i  Angle  attend,  (  or  firji  part  of  the  table  attendeth  ) 
calleth  out  the  fix  Seniors:  which  give  fcientiam  reruin  humanarum  &;  Judicum,tfC(;orii«^  W 
the  nature  of  their  parts  :  as  in  the  Eaji  after  one  fort,  in  the  JVejl  after  another,  and  fo  of  the 
rejl. 

E.  K.  A  Cloud  covereth  him. 


Pbyfick, 


Note. 


rridced. 

Note. 
Apparition. 
Conftraint, 

BaatainA, 

ot 
Saaiaivh. 


-■»  V- 


Now  tie  fpealteth  of  the  fe-        The  Upper  right  angle  in  the  next  croffe,  hath  the  fame  name  \_  A  bt^ 
cond  little  crofleabove,  on  the    j^-^  peculiar  name  1  of  God  to  call  out,  and  to  conftrain. 
xi-ht  fide  in  the  Eaft  quarter.  ^,  Which  name  mean  you  ?  j 

Ave The  name  that  is  in  the  croffe,       A.    llacza—  ^. 

The  good  Angels  are  alfo  4.  They  have  power  over  Metals^  to  ana 
them,  to  gather  them  together,  and  to  ufe  them. 

Thefe,  that  are  the  wicked  ones  ,  {made  by  three  letters  ^are  the 
Princes  of  thofe  wicked  ones,  that  flood  afar  off  in  the  Table  orthe 
Creation, 

A.  You  mean  in  our  fourth  Book. 


4  Good  Ancels. 
Metals. 

The  wicked  j4ng»ls  of  this 
portion. 

The  table  of  creation. 


Lib.  4.  aiiter  5.  Bnafpd  & 
Blifdem. 


Ave Thefe  can  give  money  coinedj  in  Gold  or  Silver, 

A.  Which  thefe? 

A.  Thefe  wicked  ones  mean  you  > 

......  I. 

The  other  give  m  w  cney  coiHed^  "but  the  metal  - 


A.  Y^ 


(^true  Relation  of  D^  Dec  his  ABions  mh  [pints ^  ^c-         1 8 1 


A*  You  mean  the  good. 
I. 

^,AiX  or. 

EX  or.  : 

A.  I  note  this  pronunciation. 

A.  The  next  is  apa.  ' 

the  third  Crojfe  it  the  Crofe  ef  trans forMation. 

A.  Mean  you  that  on  jhe  left  fide  underneath  > 

I. 

7he  fourth  is  the  Crojfe  ofthofe  Creatures  that  live  in  the  four  Elements ,  myou  calltbeik. 
The  firji  Angel  the  aire. 

thefeconi the  water, 

7be  third :-  the  earth. 

Jhe  fourth  • the  liflt  tr  fire  of  things  that  live, 

A.  Is  not  Acca  the  firft  Angel  ? 
A,  En  pe  at. 

/.  7heH  NP  at. 

A.  Then  0  tor,  and  P  wax.  AVE.  they  »re  ea fie  t»  call. 

1.  the  kttitting  together  of  Natures  lietb  in  the  four  Angels  that  are  $ver  the  firft  Crfffe. 
A.  As  t^rzla,  zlar  ?&c, 

•«  .*»  .'•  X  • 

2.  the  carrying  from  place,  which  place  lieth  in  the  Angels  $f  the  fecond  Crojfe. 
A.  1  Uiidcrftand  in  the  Angels  over  the  CrofTe. 

3.  All  Hand-crafts  i  or  Arts  are  in  th-  Angels  of  this  third  Croffe, 
A.   I  underftand  in  the  Angels  over  the  CroITe. 

E.  K.  He  drew  out  much  fire  out  of  his  mouth,  and  threw  it  from 
him  now. 

A.  I  pray  you,  what  meant  you  by  that  ? 

......  For  that  I  fulfill  my  Office  in  another  place. 

Stay,  at  this  time  Imuli  alfo  be  gone,  ,  ' 

A.  When  will  you  deal  again.  ,<  "       . 

Aye.  After  Dinner  about  one,  or  two  nf  the  Clock,. 

E.  K.  Now  he  fpreadeth  the  Curtain. 

A.  Deo  gratias  nunc  &  femper  agamus.    Amen,  - 


Transforms' 
ciea. 


The  four  Ele- 
menct. 


The  knicting 

toiccherofn*. 

cures. 

Tranjlith  i  li' 
Co  in  Locum, 
All  hand- 
crafts. 

Note  this  rare 
aftion  of  a 
fpicitualCret* 
turc« 


'r 


E.  K. 


t   Tuefday,  Junii  26.  i  Meridie  kera^  1  \  Circiter. 
Gloria  Patri,e^f. 
LMittc  lueem  tuam  &  veritatem  tnam,  0  Veuf  j  &C. 

Now  he  is  here,  and  the  white  Curtain  laid  behinde. 

4.     Ave the  Crojfe  of  the  fourth^  fird  Anile. 

A,  I  underftand  the  Angels  over  the  Croffe  in  the  lower  right  comer. 

Herein  may  you  f,nde  the  fecrets  of  Kings,  attd  fo  unto  the  loweji  degree.         Sut  you  wa/jThefecrccsof 

Vote,  That  as  the  Angeh  of  the  firil  of  the  four  Croffes  in  thi  Ei''i,  which  are  for  Stedic/ne  :  fo  '^'"'"ixteer  A 
the  fir&  of  the  fecond ,  the  firji  of  the  third,  and  the  firii  of  the  fourth  ;  fo  that  for  Medicine  there  ^^i^  forMedi- 
lefixteen,  and  fo  of  ali  the  reft  in  their  order  :  but  that  they  differ  in  tkattfome  be  the  A'lgels  of  ciae. 
■>  the  Eaji,  other  fome  of  the  Weti^  and  fo  df  the  relf... 

Notvitblianding,  to  knofv  the  world  before  the  waters,  to  be  privy  to  the  doings  of  men  ,  front  the  ^^^^   -pj^^ 

R  paters  to  Chrijl  ;  from  Chrijluntt  the  rewarding  of  the  wicked  :  The  wickfd  domgs  of  the  flejh  ,  »r  bkffed  King- 
ibe  fond  and  devililh  imigm^don'i  of  riian,  or  to  fee  what  the  bleffed  Kingdom  fhallbe,  and  hjW  f/&fdomon  eirth,' 
Mrtij^*//^^  dignified,  pvirgcd,  and  made  clean,  it  a  meat  too  fweet  for  your  mouths.  The  earth. 

A.   Curialiry  isfar  from  our  inceius;  ,,      ,        .     .        , 

Ave, But  there  is  neither  Patriarch  nor  Prophet  fanftified, Martyr, 

or  Confcflbr  ,  King  ,  or  Governour  of  the  people  upon  earth,  that  his 
name,  continuance,  ar.d  end,  is  not  (like  the  Moon  at  midnight)  in  thefe 
Tables. 


Ergi,rhffe  are  here 
to  be  iearoej  put. 

A.  Mtxtmi  enim 
ffUndet  fy  manjfcSla 
eft,  in  medio  cceli  ij  ia 
,    ,  J>/."ni/nBTi>. . 

A.  Mean  you  not  the  Croffe  of  the  fourth  firfi  Angle,  to  be  that,  which  is  of  a  O  u  r  r  z. 
Andbisfraufverfary  of  a  I  O  a   i    ? 

[z  a]]  Ave It 


iSi      J 'true  ^el4timi)f&,DQt  bis  ABms  mth'/pjrits^.6Cc,. 


Ave Itiffo.  ■       ■  Mao2 -J  i'  nut tr.v 

A.    I  iinderftand  not  well,  your  account  of  i6  Angels  for  medicine.  \ 

Ave Are  there  not  four  principal  Crojfes?  Every  Croffe  hath  tilfofeur.  The  fir jl  ef  every 

four  are  the  Crofle  of  inedicine^  fo  that  there  be  fixteen. 

Ave......  One  book,  of  perfect  paper.       One  labour  of  a  few  da)i£s,- „y,^„. 

Fortf,For  the.      The  calling  them  together,  and  the  yielding  of  their  promife,  the  repetition  of  the  names,  pf 

ihtirpro        C?«r^, arc  fufticient. 

miCo;-..  I  /jaif  given  y oil  Corn  :  I  have  given jou  alfo  ground.       Defire  God  to  give  yon' ability  to 

till.  "  •  '♦■   ' 

A.   Wewillprayfor  his  help  that  is  Almighty. 

I  an^feebefore.God.    .^^CfU^rtliat  catch  can.  ^  ^^'\,'\>T^!i^:)%'\:''^^1-\^x^"'^■^ 

Be  it  now  ai  it  was  before.  E.K.    Hc  maUOterfl  Up^JtltO  the 

aire,  andisgdne.    "]^ ''^ ^ '   ,  ■ 

A.  When  would  you  that  I  (hould  prepare  that  book  ,  and  what>call  j^iLpcrf ed:,^  jipd  ,i^pw 
many  leaves  would  you  wifh  me  to  make  it  of?  ;;;  ^  Ji  ,    v  jonisf)  .i\. 

'         lour  book,  ^  ""f  of  my  charge.  -^  aq  j,^  ^l. 

A.  Lord,  as  thou  haft  dealt  mercifully  with  us  hitherto,  and  haft  giyeivus the  lincferftand-:^ 
ing  of  many  fccrets,  foin  refpeft  of  this  ftrange  dealing  wich  us,  and  leaving  usof  ^T;f,we  arCj^, 
defirous  to  know  fome  caufe :  and  therein  we  require  that  Mudimi  may  be  fcnt.  ^ 

E.K.  She  is  here  in  the  ftone.      * 

W^d' How^ojou?  £.  if.  Slre:.;maketh  a  Iow\ 

;i  curfie. 

A.  I  declared  our  admiration  of  ^ff  hisfofudden  departure,  aud  required  her  opinion  of 

tltc^^.  •  ^  :';    J  '.  '"  '-."•■•)  ■->      ' 

' "  .'  Mad Surely  Sir^  I  canmt  tell  :  but  I  will  go  fee  if  my  mother  can  tell.  ■  i3 

-^jjiJji-  .....'    A.   He  that  is  the  Creatour  of  all  things,  be  mcrcifuU  unto  us,  and  lighten  our  hearts  with 
■•>«<rue  knowledge,  as  our  truft  is  in  him.  ^'   '.'     ' 

E.  K.  She  went  away,  and  came  again  after  a  little  while. 

Mad Mj  mother  fayeth,  yoa  fhould  have  been  at  the  Emperours.    . 

A.  But  you  fee  it  isimpofllble  to  get  thither  without  fome  good  pro\4fion  of  money  made 
by  our  great  friend  y^.  L.     I  pray  you,  what  can  yon  fay  of  y/r^f  f"  ,^ 

*Mad. LMy  gentle  brother^  Ave  is  a  good.  Creature  ;  indeedyou  might  have  made  mdre  of 

him. 

A.  I  befeech  you  to  give  us  fome  Declaration  of  ^7/e  his  laft  words. 

Mad. '.....■  TJfrf  is  no  word  nnperfeft  :  My  brother  Ave  his  nature  is  to  be  plain  and  fliortf 

A.    I  pray  you  to  fay  fomewhat  more  plainly  of  Ave  his  laft  words.    . 

Mad //  it  rfere  the  commandment  of  wj  mother ^  I  could  do  it.       But  this  is  the  good  mil 

of  my  brother  toward  you.  ..i->i'.i'HK'!  n<''<i;<  ' 

A.  As  your  brother  hath  done  this  of  his  geod  will,  fo  do' I  defire  you  of  your  goodwill  ' 
to  do,  or  fay  fonievyhat  to  our  comfort.  ,  ■  - 

Mzd.  .-...  Sir,  I  pray  you, pardon  me.       ImaynotmTddteyi>ithK\thisdoing.   -     Jkaveno-., 

thing  to  fay  to  you,  but  I  know  my  Motherha:hntftch  10  fay  to  you  .     '' 

As  the  mighty  thunder  cometh,fo  cometh  tke  promife  of  God. .  Rtidulih»s  xhs  Em}e- 

lo  i:3i3:"l  0  tTj J^  f'le  Emperour  fwj  mother  fayeth)  do  amy  thing  agauiji  X,asky^  or  bin- ,.  v''"*'' "°"'  -,-4  i 

W.f:  ■<«/>}  0;e  anfweteth  in  earnefl)  there Jh all  be  an   tmpertur.    '  -      EirncftVs  means  t^ 

■Tt  "T'  \  v.t;-  T^^'  ^?'^  ^'""""  "'°'''  P^*^^"^-  •   '  b«  .e«Pero..r:,   W.      , 

'■ "''  ^fy  Mother,  my  Siflers  ,  Ave,  //,  myfelf,and  the  rejl  of  us  wii)'Uot  be  fni^hu  ^  ^y^^V-  a  : 

_>ojf  in  yo'.irneed.  '     V-    ■  i -^.■ '  a-i^  cGmtoriible  -jS«>- 

■'.;"«,  ..;.  n:'  U^'-1  •-•  ••:•• -^""^  Content  your  felf:  For  ,yet  a  feafon  ,  jm:mik"ve.p4tjmk,       GoUhbp.^^i^ 
"  jh».u.P^W'0^  feel  nothing  to  fay  to  you.  ,'.„r.,  Mi  'i,l.      '     ■-■■      V     ■      ,^ 

Mifencos,  Clemens  &pius  eft  Deus  Nofter  :  Cujus  nomen  fitbcnediftmni  Nunc  8cifempcr.  -i. 
Amen.  "^ 

'J'    :  ■  • ^j ■    '■■     -11  :  |!-iIl'"M     ,./  ■"  •> 

«••""  .  ■.,,!,_.  ,  >-;\ 


■^S'iV'.'    Abcut  feven  of  the  Clock  this  afternoon,  E.  K.  came  again  up  into  my  fiudy;  and  j 
fcm<?  me  rcadinp,  and  confiderin?  this  Aftion.IipP3ti  to  hiirf^r.lU  r,f  ;r   o.,rI  ,,;n„^   „...  ,„  „r_  "^ 


lagmg 
[•5']  "  day. 


J^rne  'i^eUtion  of  D^  Dec  his  Aciicns  wttb  fpiritSy  (3cc.      1S3 


day.    Nay,  (faid  I)  any  man  livins;,  clfe,  would  have  found  juft  caufe  of  comfort,and  to  qjive 
thanksfor  AFE,  ('  ch  (ptcclieaco  .liin,  as  he  iifed  uncoyou  upon  trie  compailion  ,  and  no 
skofF,  &c.  B  t  you  by  and  by  called  hiw  Utrvil^  and  ragd  on  i  rthcr  againji  Mic'iael  ani  G^i- 
\)n(^,  and  the  heivenfy  poffen  \'i\ch  moll  horrible  rpeeches,«$"<:.  Hebecame  vfry  pcn!Cfnc,an  I  ac-     noTA. 
kjtowU'dged  th:7t  he  bad  orfFended  Go.i :  and  faidjthat.  furely  it  was  of  the  Devil,  for  he  did  not  Pxaiic'''* 
remember  his  words  :  but  he  is  fure  that  they  were  nor  decent,  and  befeechtd  God  to  fdr;t'v'  '^"  f'-^if 
him  :  And  fo  did  I,  and  was  very  glad  of  this  his  reforming  himfelf ,  and  we  (being  ofc  (be-  ",7/^,^5  '* '" 
fore)  called  down  toiupper)  were  goin^  out  of  my  Study  :  and  as  he  was  alnioii  at  the  door  jl^otc   ihis 
to.  go  put,  he  faid  to  mt,I  feel   a  verj  heavy  thing  ipon  my  jhoulder  :  and  it  if  warm  with  a'l :  minnerof « 
Whereat  I  put  to  the  door ,  and  wc  far  doivn  again  :  Verily  thinkingi(as  it  vvas)  that  it  was 'icvf  rt^'og 
the  nrcCcnce  of  ^  T  £,  whereupon  I  faid  unto  the  Creature.  °"  '•''- '!'°"' 

A.  In  the  name  of  Jefus,  Ave  art  thou  there,  <ie  anlwered  immediately  after  as  followeth.     whhall. 

-AtB,'.....  Bee  aufe  thon  \_E.K.'\ht''t  ac's^nowled^ed  my  honour  again :  I  wi/l  alfo  ackjiowledgemj 
helt)  toward  you  :  But  where  man  curfeth  the  Heavens,  what  b  ly  Creature  can  abide  ?  Or 
vhere  Satan  ii  brought  into  poirclTion,  by  free  will  of  man  ,  what  good  Angel  it  he  that  depart-- 
eth  not  ? 

A.  O  Lord,  confirm  thy  mercies  iponus  from  henceforth. 

Ave As  concerningy:nr  A~iion  ,  The  Heavens  bear  witnejfe  of  it. 

Jea^'yt^erday  did  the  god  Angels  contend  with  the  wickfd :  and  there  A  There  was  a  terri- 

w«  it  sreat  confiia  betwixt  them;  and  that  about  the  love  of  God  towards        ^''^^^    ^!"'^  "^  thunder 

°i  Ar~-  T.        T        II       r^  -I  I  »""    rain,    tovfard    the 

you,  and  your  A^.ion.         B'<f  I  will  vifit-you  again  in  the  morning  ,  and        ^„j  ^^   ^J,.  yefte,-dayes 

will  ptrform  my  good-will  in  God  toward  you.         But  th '«  muli  pray  often       Aftion:  whirh,  (  faid.was 

if  thou  wilt  avoid  temptation.        Godbe  viercifull  to  you,  forgive  yoUyand       fomewhai  more  thenna- 

ftYtngihenyou  to  the  end.     .  t.n\-^\. 

A,  Amen,  fweet  Jefu,  Amen, 

iL.  When  all  was  thus  ended,  I  delivered  toEiC.  my  Pfalter  book  (with  the  fhort  prayers  w    -c  *   p. 
annexed  to  every  PfalniJ   where  he  himfelf  very  devoutly  ,  and  p:;nitently  prayed  three  of^^^^^^L  Lg  " 
thfm,  and  I  hearing  al  (oof  them,  gave  my  confent  in  heart  to  the  fame  prayers.  eth. 

A.  To  Godonely  be  all  praifc,  honour,  and  glory,  now  and  ever.    Amen. 


Wednefday,  27.  Junii.  Cracovise.  Mane  bor^m  circiter.  7. 

Orationc  Dominica  finita,  &  peciiliari  Oratione  contra  Tentationes  Sathan£E,apparuit  ij>fe 
AVE,^c. 

E.  K.  He  is  here. 

A.  Gloria  P  tri,  &  filio,  8c  fpiritui  fanfto,d^(:.    Amen. 

Ave.  ...  ..  In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  holy  Ghofi, 

A.    Amen, 
_x  Now, what  it  that,  that  ii  hard  f)  you? 

4.  Firft,  whether  the  Table  (for  the  middle  Crofle  of  uniting  the  four  principal  parts)  be 
made  perfeft,  or  no. 

Ave Thou  hajl  found  out  the  trvth  of  it. 

A.  I  think  a  myftery  did  depend  upon  the  choice  of  the  three  names,  Lexarph,CemanaH,znd 
labitam. 

Ave. "that  ii  not  to  our  purpofe. 

A.  Yoi  bad  me  ch  fe  out  of  the  fables  the  Chara£ters  of  feweft  Letters,  and  I  found  them 
tobcO  A-^A  J  A,  and  T  5  you  faid  they  are  eight ,  you  faid  there  arc  eight  in  fo  r:I  know 
riot  what  this  meanech.  ^ 

Ave.  ,....Tou  vi:iit  make  'p  the  name  Parzoan.  A.   It  is  the  fecond  part  off  the 

A.  What  fhall  become  of  the  L  averfed  P  22  aire. 

Ave. ......It  may  be  bi,'.rL. 

A.  What  mi  ft  I  now  do  with  that  name  ? 

Ave In  Exarph  there  wanteth  ««  L.  which  L.  is  of  more  force  then  the  N.     A.  So  is  not  one 

mti  therefore  it  is  fet  in  the  Tables.  As  far  at  that  N.  ftretrheth  in  the  Charafter,     letter    fupeiflu- 
/i  f(jr /.'<z// that  Countrey  be  confumed   with  fire,  and  fwallowed  into  Hell ,  at     ws  ,or  w^inting 
Sodom  was  for  wickedneffe.        The  end  <jf  all  things  is  even  at  hand  :  And  the     *Vpro'^h''f ''  f 
icarth  mujl  be  purified  ,  and  delivered  to  another.  things  at  hand 

TkeMeivenslhaUbejjtimtishoycthtmMyt^.  Jnd  the  earth  fliall  bring;  NO  l  E 
forth  without  Tillage  :  Trophets  [peak,  of  dayes,  [as]  prefently,that  *  are  far  off.  Nova  Tma. ' 
But  we  /peak,  of  dayes  that  are  hard  at  h.7nd.       f  flr,immediarely  after  your  *  *^"^' 

being  with  C3Efar,j^/j//  the  whole  world  be  in  fudden  alteration.  Battails      Kodolfbus  Ciefar. 
and  bloudfhed  great  mmher  :  The  Kings  of  the  earth  fl^all  run  unta  the  Hills,       Now  Inkiura  mah- 
tnd  [ay  cover  Hf.^  tminfiare. 

v,,,  '  [a  a   2]  A.  O 

-.  1 1 — 


84      A- true^elation  of  I>",  Dee  his  jBions  vpithffirits,  &c. 


Ami  Ch.ia. 
A.  L. 
Mmcy,  provi- 

\n  Conftanti 
nnplc.  1 5  Sy 
I  j.Stpusa^. 


?4  Seniors. 
N  ne,Thisdi- 
verfity   of 
\»orking. 
The  four 
plagues  J  or 
iju»rters. 


Th!  book. 


A  rerfeft  m»- 
fter  ready. 


The  twelve 


A.  0-,  Tlion  mighty  God  of  Hofts  :  be  our  flrength  and  comfoir. 

When  you  hear  the  peoplefay,  Ls,  there  k  a.  man-cbiU  that  doth  great  marvaih^  (which 

is  'even  a:  the  door  threfbold.)  Then,  then  fliallyoa  fee  the  calamity  of  the  earth. 

Bit  let  Las\ie,  the  fervant  of  God  do  of  he  is  commarJed  :  And  what  goodnefTe  foeyer  he  cra- 
veth  ihall  follow  him,  for  theLord  hath  fpared  him  among  the  Kings  of  the  eaith. 

Let  hi'w  provide  for  thii  one  journey  :  Hejhall  mt  need  to  provide  for  the  reft :  For,  he  thathath 
all,  hath  provided  for  him. 

The  fitreenth  day  of  September,  that  fhall  be  twelve  moneths,  ftiall  you  fet  up  the  iigne  of 
the'Croff'e  jeven  in  the  midd'ft  oi  Conftantinople. 

A..  Thy  will  be  done,  O  Lord,  to  thy  honour  and  glory. 

A  ve. .. ...  1/i  this  Kingdom  fhall  be  much  hloudjhed^  and  the  one  fhall  cut  anothers       Poland,    p^j. 

th;-oa.r.       And  as  the  Lord  hath  p-omifed^fo  fl.^ail  it  come  to  fajfe,  '"'§0  confirmatu 

Ave i  Kyoto  tkelahle.  <li ."i.L.fone. 

A.   Of  the  Principal  King  of  B/it/rifa,or  5<rtfr/iir/z,  (ufing  the  laft  a  twicej  I  doubt  of  the 
perfeft  writing  of  it. 

Ave Is  it  not  written  s'  It  is  all,  mojl  eafie  ,    and  in  gathering  thou  canfinet  erre. 

The  24  Seniors  are  all  of  one  Office  .-  But  when  thou  wilt  work^  in  the  Eaft  ,  thou  muft  takj  fuch  ^ 
hear  rule  there ;  fo  mu'i  thoH  d»  of  the  reft. 

A-  Do  you  mean  the  eftate,  in  refpedofany  place  wefliall  be  id,or  in  refpeft  of  any  earth- 
ly place  J, accounted  alwayes  the  Eaft  part  of  the  world,  wherefoeverwc  be? 

Ave....^  The  Eaft  and  Weft,  in  refpeft  of  your  Poles.       Whatwillyou  elfe  of  me  f 

A.  Whether  thefe  four  Tables  be  joyncd  in  their  right  places,  or  no. 

Ave 7heybe. 

A.   Of  the  Letters  in  theTranfverfary  of  the  wicked  their  black  CrcfTe^ 
I  know  no  1  fe,  as  of  m  o  t  i  V  a  t ;  nan,  &c. 

Ave. .....  Tho"-  pa  It  kjiowy  vihen  thou  writeft  thy  book. 

A;  1  defire  you  of  the  book  to  fay  fomewhat  more  for  the  fafhion,  paper,  and  binding  &r, 

Ave Ikcumayeft  nfethy  difcretion. 

A.  You  mean  (I  truft)  the  book  that  you  bid  me  to  prepare :  For,  the  other  is  not  for  my 
writing. 

Ave.  •...•  h  if  mt.        I  my  felf  will  ftand  with  you,  and  ftiew  how  to  praftife. 

A.  Eleffed  be. God  for  hisready  help. 

A.  I  will  prepare  the  book  Cby  the  grace  of  GodJ  with  all  fpeed. 

A.  As  concerning  the  Offices,  vcrtues,  and   powers  of  the  three  o- 
ther  qusrters  of  the  Tabfe,  what  fhall  we  think  of  them  ? 

Ave They  are  all  as  the  firft. 

Note.     Thou  haft  three  names  cf  God,  out  of  the  line  of  the  holy  Ghoft,  in  the  pruici- 


Noce,  of  iLe 
letters    in     ths 
black  Tcanyer- 
fary. 


The   Offices 
four  quarters.' 


of  all   the 


A. 


book;  cnely 
once  to  be 
ufcii. 


names  of  God  pallCrofTe  of  the  iirft  Angle,  fo  haft  thou  three  in  the  fecond,  &c^ 
Ba^nc'r^^*         f  07^  dayes  (after  ycur  book,  is'  made,  that  is  to  fay,  written)  muft  you  onely  call  upon  thofe 
Fouc  dayes       names  of  God,  or  en  the  God  of  Hefts,  in  tkofe  names  : 

Fourteen    *  And  14  dayes  after  you  ftiall  (in  this,  or  in  fome  convenient  place)  Call  the  Angels  hy  Peii- 

dayes.  tion,  and  by  the  name  of  God,  unto  the  which  thty  are  obedient. 

Obedient.  The  15  day  you  ftiall  L\ozt\\  your  f elves,  in  veftures  made  of  linncn  ,  white:  and  fo  ha-^ 

vealiTcs '""'"  ^^^  apparition,  ufe,  and  praaice  of  the  Creatures.        For,  it  is  not  a  labour  of  yeari,nor  many 

dayes.  ^ 

E.  K.  This  is  Tomewhat  like  the  old  failiion  of  Mas^ick. 

Giiincnr  and       Ave Nay,  they  all  played  at  this. 

Idu  muft  never  »p  the  Garment  after,  but  that  once  onely,   neither  the  book. 

E.  K.   To  what  end  is  the  book  made  then,  if  it  be  not    to  be  ufed 
after; 

A.  It  is  made  for  to  be  ufed  that  day  on.ly. 
Ave. . ....  What  will  you  elfe  ? 

A.   As  you  beft  know  :  we  need  inftruftions ;  yet  necefTary  for  us. 

Av« Very  few. 

Ave It  is  aftem  with  fait,  hit  it  wanteth  leaves. 

E.  K.  What  mean  you  by  that  } 

^^'^ '^'^^^'^^  ^'^  mcrekzvcs  then  fruit,  and  in  many  aaions  there  le  nr.re  circU7»(iances  then 

7r.atter.  ^ 

A.  But  here  is  onely  marrow,  and  no  bones,  or  flefh.  -\ 

A.   -As  concerning  the  great  multitude  that  £.  K.   faw  in  the  Vifion  ftanding  after  the  /?xJ 

teen  Ange  s,  next  th?  Ga^c,  you  made  no  mention  in  your  Defcription  of^the  Vifion  :  There^ 

fore  I  would  know  what  they  are.  A 

h\t....,.'IhfyhcMiiuftersaudferuaiits.  '  ^^' 

rhen 


Fruit  than 
leaves. 


i 


^  true  Relation  ofjy.  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  fpirits,  ^o         n'B 5 

E.  K.  *AViterySeMde>tna,asE.K.{'ii\d.  '*-    •       A- Of  This 

iK'  fihere  (Jjalt  thou/Ve  thy  oli  Sondennaj*  and  many  other  wicksd  ones,  that  thou  kali  dealt  with-  '*"^''«'<1  •  »'"=''■»- 
all.  Hereby  Ihall  you  judge  truly  of  wicked  CMagkk..  God  he  with  you :  I  ycill  he  ready,  ^y  iu^r^'^thts 
^hen you  need  me.  _  Adion    faid. 

A.  JLtcmo  &  omnipotenti  Crearori  rerum  omiiiumj   vifibilium  8c  invlfibirmm  fit  onmis  Seeing      his 

laus,  honofj  gloria,  &:  graciariim  aftio.       Jmett.  "»""=  's  fomc 

to  be  known 
(  and  not  by 
me:  for  I  hid  received  th:  Sacnmenc  with  Mr.  Mir.iver,  of  whotnlhad  him,  nrvcr  tobewtay  ordlfclofe  his  nsnie)Iwill  tellyou 
fomewhat  ot'liim.  Hcappesrcth  in  many  forms,  till  at  length  he  appeir  in  a  Triangle  of  fire,  and  bainf;  cotiflrnined  '«  'he  Circle, 
he  caketh  form  (  as  it  w  re  )  of  a  great  Gyant,  and  will  declare  bct"re  for  a  month  to  come  which  fpiticsdo  orderly  range  :  whic  \ 
by  r.aroc  being  tilled,  will  do  their  offices,  with  a  few  other  ciicumftinccsufedj  Sec.  Tlii?,.  indeed  was  gncj  ot  whom  I  made  moft 
«  account,  &c. 

£».  I.  Remember,  I  have  not  yet  heard  any  thing  of  the  5  Princes  which  held  up  the  traine 
'of  the  chief  King. 

2.  Neither  any  thing  of  the  Trumpeter  which  vv>ent  before  all.  Doubts. 

3.  Neither  of  the  letters  in  the  Tranfverfary  of  the  black  CrofTe. 

4.  Alfo  of  *  Docepax  Ted 9 a}id, he'mg  referred  to  Cilkia,  Nemrodiana^znd  fafhlagsnia-  m  the  *  Declared  by 
htc  cxpofition  of  the  places  by  vulgar  names  :    and  before  in  the  naming    of  them  by  the '^''*'''^'  ''"•* 
names  of  Creacion   they  were  applyed  to    Italta.  and    Britama^  :  One  of  thofe  is  to  bc^^^^"*^' 
doubted  of. 

5.  We  are  defirous  to  know  the  Etymologies  of  all  the  names  of  God  which  we  (hall  ufe, 
.either  to  Gpd  himfelf,  or  to  the  Angels. 

6.  We  require  the  form  of  our  Petition  or  Invitation  to  be  made  to  the  Angels. 

-7.    Of  the  20  (and  more  )  diverfities  or  corrections  of  this  principal    Table,    we  require  • 
your  ccnfure,  which  diverfitiesl  have  (  by  con  ^1,' re)  fo  made  or  amended. 

8.   Whereas  I  was  [A]will€d  to  call  14  dayes,':he  Angels  which  are  to  be  ufed  :  fo  would  I  A-  Pagkafe- 
know  whether  alfo  I  fhould  fummon  the  wicked"h^r  e  recorded  (out  of  the  black  Crofle,  ha- ""'"'"'« ?'«'<;- 
Ving  their  off-fpring  )  likewife  14  dayes.  • 


Saturday,   t  CracovU,  Junii  30,  Manh^  circa  p.    homm. 

Orations  domiaica  fittitay&  -prj-pofitii  Hits  J.    dubiif,quievi}nns  paululurn.     Deinde^  aliquot  or  a- 
tiones  exffalterio  recitavi,  iterum  quievimus  faulaluni.     Ad  femihoram  nihil  apparuit. 

At  length  appeared  a  face,  very  great,  with  wings  about,  ad  joyned  to  it  j         afterward  he 
feemed  to  be  in  a  great  Globe  of  fire. 

Hearken  tomy voice. 

Modefty,patience,a;?ihumility  0/ heart  and  body,   <fotA  if /o«2  to  thefe  AHions.     Tell  me     Note* 
iiW  many  7 bunders  the  Lord  hath  injhre  for  the  wicked.  j 

t..  O  Lord,  we  know  nor. 
"- Were  you  ever  in  the  ^ecret  caves  of  the  Earth  ? 

A.  No,  Lord,  never. 
'  ......  Ihen  tell  nie  hove  many  fcindes  the  Lord  hath  prepared  for  anyeaf? 

\  B..  Neither  that  can  we  tell  :  We  are  not  of  the  Lord  his  Coimcil|»n  thefe  things  of  his 
providence. 

Can  you  tell  me  none  of  thefe  (juefiioas? 

_  ^.....Canyon  tell  what  Jhall  become  of  your  felves  ? 

A.  God  onely  knoweth,  and  no  creature  but  by  him  :    for  all  things   are  kept  Uncertain 
until  the  end. 

.. ....  lou  beget  children  i  \now  you  the,  hour  wherein  they  pall  he  born  ? 

ToubegiJt  labour,  can  yoH  tell  what  peint  of  time  joujhall  end  in  .<* 

A.  Godonly  is  the  Fountain  of  all  wifdom  and  truth.  ■ 

^'f;V,  then  1  fee, you  are  drowned  in  ignorance  and  know  yiothing. 

.E.  K.  He  turneth round  very  fwiftly, 

......  Even  as  the  Adder  leadeth  out  her  young  ones,  the  firfi  day   one  foot,   (  out  of  her  hole ')  Kct  Note  this  fimi- 

lecaufe  they  fnoM  eat,  hut  becanfe  they  might  acquaint  themfelves  with  the  air,  and  herfubtlety.         liiude  well. 

The  fecond  day,  'one  yard  and  more:Jhe  encompaffeth  her  hole,  andwindeth  to  andfro,and  teach- 
*e«r  to  creep  ;  and  fo  five  or  fx  dayes,  till  theykizcw  how  to  wove  andjiir  their  bodies. 

After  thefeventk  day,  fl:e  teadeth  them  further,  and  faineth  deceit,  jirikjng   the  ground  with  her 

tail,  as  though  it  were  the  found  of  fame  one  at  hand :    And  then  gaping^  heginnsth  to  hiffe,  and  fily- 

t^hup  fear  unto  her  youngones,  fo  that  they  enter  into  her  vim'h.    And  thuspe  doth  till  they  be  12 

\vr.j^  dayes  old  :     Then  fJje  leadeththem  a:jiones-caft,.and  'exercifeth   them  hth  with  fe^r,  and    '    ' 

\btdtngthemfelves  •:,   And  when  they  fleep(  being  young  and  wearied  with  labour')  jhe  fiealeth  from 

them  and  maketb  a  noife  amongft  the  leaves  and  fmallfiones,  with  the  moving  »f  her  'hinder  parts  : 

■ '  -.1^     ,  Tt 


iS ^  ;     ^A  true T^elation  ofiy^  Dee  his  AUions  mtb /pints,  &c. 


Triftnpliin^ 


To  the  fTttentJhe  wight  fee  what  Jhift  her  wormes  can  make,  which  flirred  up  with  fear,  and  mijjing 
their -mother  ,  fo';  learn  to  couch  themfelvesintheChyyntiesoftheearthi  At  length,  after fitence, 
the  mother  thnlieth  Oftt  herself-,  and  doubleth  her  tongue  (  with  the  found  whereof  (he  vfeth  to  call 
them  )  ^hey  come  to^^fther  and  rejojce,  wreathing  themfdves  diverfly  about  her  body,  for  joj  :  She 
for  areconipence^fjferethtkemtJ  hangvprn  her  back^^  and fo  waJtereth  to  her  hole  ;  where/he ga- 
th:r eth  the  leaves  of  the  earth  :  and  after  jhe  hath  chewed  them  f mail  ani  tender,  with  her  teeth, 
and  ntingled  them  with  the  did,  (he  fpiieth  them  out  agtin,  andbeginneth  to  lick^them  by  little  and 
little,  as  though jhe  hungered,  which  jhe  fubtlely  doth,  that  her  wormes  might  eat  and  forget  their 
hungtynrffe.  •  '  "    '"H 

Finally,  in  20  dayes,  they  become  big,  and  as  sk^ilfiil  in  the  property  of  their  hjnd .  .  .  JI.e  (I fay")  " 
Ira^eih  them  cut  into  a  fertile  place,  and  full  of  dew,  and  full  of  bujhes,  and  places  apt  to  cover 
them,  where  they  feed,  dwell, obCerve  their  craft,  and  at  laft  forfake  their  mother.     Even  foy    it^. 
if  forth  you  ;  So  the  Lord, (^the  true  Serpent  and  worme  )   leadethyou  out  from  day  to  day,    accBr-^ 
dingto  your  fireng'.h '• -and  as  you  g^ow,  tothe  intent  you  might,   at  laji  be  brought  unto  the  pleafant^ 
true  wifJora,     diW,  and  food  of  his  wfrfj,  which  is  Triumphing  true  vvitdom, 

"But  this  the  Lord  fcarech  of  you  ;  that,  as  the  wormes  did,  fo  you  will  forfa\e  your  mother. 
A.   P'orfake  us  not,  O  God,  Confirm  thy  graces  in  us,  and  we  ihall  no: forfake  thee,  '^ 

Toe  nalivre  of  the  Serpent,  is,  not  to  forfakf  bh  youn%.  '   '■ '  ' 

A.  O  Lord  we  depend  onely  on  thee,  and  without  thy  grace  and  continual  help,   we 
perifh. 
N  O  E.  I^he  Lord  told  Noe  long  before,  the  Flood  would  come,   be  believed  him :  Therefore  he  is  fafe  in  '' 

loth  worlds.   The  Cons  in  law  of  Ln,  funk  into  Wd\,f$r  that  they  derided  the  words  of  God, and  "'^ 
believed  them  not.    His  wife  recarvea  falt-Jione,  for  that  Jhe  looked  bark^  and  did  contrary  to 
^'^=''-  the  Commandment  of  G}d        Mofes  hs.d  the  reward  of  his  holineffe  in  thit  world pluckj  back.,  he^'^ 

IZ'Vvetra  '^""f"  ^'f"''^^  ^^'^  ^^'^^  ^^• 

hic'vabis  a-        I,asthemtffengerofGod,am  as  one  that  fay^  Czvc,  Tal{e  heed  that  you  become  Hot  fon  in  laws  J 

q»am  potcimus  tlough)ou  pajfe  the  fire,  Take  heed  you  look,  notb-ick, :    for  if  you  do,  you  fitall  mt  fee  the  flood,  tiei-  ^ 
eliceie,  therjhall  the  Lord  put  a  vail  betwixt  yoft  and  veftgeance,  neither  {I  fay  )  jhall  thepromifes  of  Cod- 

come  in  your  diyes.      If  God  had  takfnyou  upinv  theheavens  and  placedyou  beftre  hh  ThroHe^anil  , 
told  you  the  things  that  are  to  come,youwjuld  believe  :  But  that  yo'4  cannot  do.  .'J,* 

The  Lord  is  merciful,  he  defcendeth  into  your  houfes,  and  there  tellethyon  what  it  to  c»me,  where" 
yo-i  may  uhderjiand  :    But  you  believe  him  not.     Therefore  faith  the  Lord  of  you,  I  fear  you' will 
^'  forfake  your  mother;  But  i(y$udo  it,I  f.iy,'i(yaudo  it,   I  will  makf  of  the  Mothesy   w/e«,  that 

fhall  teftifie  my  name. 

E.  K.  I  ever  told  you  I  do  not  believe  them  ,  nor  can  believe  tfiem, 
nor  will  defirc  to  believe  them.  ;'■' 

Faiih.    ''  If  you  be  faithful,  you  be  able  to  comprehend  ;    I/joa  ^f  obedient  and  humble,  3^« 

Obedience.      Creatires  of  Heiven  Jhall  abide  withyou  .  Yea  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft.  . 
Humility.        ^^\\  ,„^;^^  f,,^  dwelling  with  y^u.     If  you  perfevere,  even  with  faith  and  humility,  you  Jhall  fee  the 

wicked  d  >yes  that  are  to  come,  enjoy  the  promifes  of  Gjd,  and  be  partaker  of  thofc  blefled  days 
A  Caveat.        that  follow  ;     For  wonders  unheard  of ,  iny  and  of  (he  world,  are  at  hand.     You  are  warned. 

The  Spirit  of  Cod  reji  with  you. 
A,  Amen,  • 

/\  r        xt'       ^'  O  Lord,  fliall  we  continue  in  this  wavering  or  ftifF-necked  willful  blindnefle,  and  fro- 
m:s  lackrmis  wardly  keep  out  thy  mercies  and  graces  by  ourflellily  fenfe,  and  unreafonable  perfwafion  a- ,^ 
h.ii  a  me  fy    gainft  the  vci  ity  of  thy  tiue  Minifters  ? 
valJe  ferio   ad      j.   All  thri:gs  are  Committed  to  thy  charge. 

Kim  dilU  c-      ^_  O  Lord  as  much  as  ever  I  can  do  by  prayer  orotherwife,   I  do,  and  yet  I    enjoy  no' 
*  fruit  ofmy  long  travel.  • 

2.  7houhar  ground,  fw  if  thou  can.  ^ 
A.   How  can  I  without  further  inftruftions  and  help  ?  andnow,  when  I  require  Ave  to  come,' 

he  Cometh  not:  O  Lord  comfort  me. 

3.  A  V  E  Jhall  come  when  thou  haji  need  of  him. 
A.  InteDominefperavi,  &  fpero,  Sifperabo.     In  die  Tribulationis  cxaudies  rac.    P».efa- 

gium  meum,  fpesmea,  vita  8c  beatitudo  mea  Jefu  Chrifte,tibi  curaPatre  &Spiritu  Sanfto  lit 
pmnis  honorj  laus,  Gloria  &  Gratiarum  aftio        Amen. 


Monday,   t  Craccvia,  Junii   2.  Mane  her  a  i. 
Oratione  dominica  finita,  &  mtra  aliqua  interpofita,  &  aliquot  aliii  ex  pfalterio  recitatis  pre- 
cih/s,&poJ}  varim  meas  ad  Veum  ejaculationes. 
F ofi  femihoram'.      At  length  Ave  appeared  to  E.  K.  in  the  Shew-ftone,  &c. 

A.    O  Lord,  all  honour,  thanks,  andpraifc,  be  unto  thee,  who  hcareft  the  prayers  of  thy 


rant. 


fimple  fervant. 


A.Firi}, 


Jjrue.^eUnon  of\D^.  jbo^Ms  Jdkns  mth  ffxirits,  &c.       1 87 


^,^(^v  Fifft!./<>r.die  refei;niingofdiseriity  of  leuers  m  the  names  wricceii,  I  leyuire  your  aid, 
unle/Te  you  will  hrl!  fay  fooievvhat  e!fe. 

Bj  tljifarne  Jefof  iipho  fitteth  onthe  fi'ght  haai  of  bis  Father y  atid  is  th:  wifdom  ''of  hit  Fathtryl 
requelijiii^tojrocfed  W.ithus.      ...  -.rjj  ...,  ,   „:r.;f<..i  iv- .     .  ...l 

Ave So  that  the  body  of  Chriji,  now,  U  glorified  and  immsrtaL 

A.  Moft  rriie  it  is  —  Mors  illi  ultra  n^n  iion  duminabitur- 
'    AvE.[,-.,./^vf  oi  the'?rophets,tk'it.yfere  fullfiled  with  the  Holy  Ghoii  and  Spirit  o^God,  before 
Chrilt^tajied  of  h'nn^inthat  he  jl.ould  coMe  .if  a  Saviour ,  and  in  the  feed  of  man  ;  So   ii  the  Pro- 
fhefie  of  this  time,  Chrili  being  afcended,  in  the  fame  Spirit.     But  ih.it   Chriji  Jha II  cotac  in  his  AJvemus  d)ri.> 
glorified  body,  Iriumphing  againji  Satan,  and  alibis  enemies.  Si. 

A.  io  be  it>0  Lord. 

Aye, .,.,..  But  that  the  words  of  the  Propbefies  maj  he  fulfilled.  It  it  neceffary  that  the  Earth 
fwarjn, 'and  be  glutted  with  her  own  fornication  and  idolatry:  which  ^  what  it  jhall  be,  the  fame 
fpiric  will  open  unto  you. 

A.   Fiat  voluntas  Dei. 

Ave Thatyou  may  »ot  onely  be  wife  in  forfakjng  the  world,  and  forefeeing  the  dangers  of 

ferditio^  j  But  alfo  preach  the  wonders  of  the  fame  Cfjrijt,  and  hu  great  mercies,  which  is   to  come 
and  to  appe-ar-  in  the  cloudes  with  his  body  glorified.      The  Lord  faid  to  Satan,  I  will  give  thee 
fower,  in  the  end  over  their  bodies,  and  thtn  Jhallbe  caft  out  into,  the  fields,  and  th.n  for  my  Our  bodies  to 
names  fake:  But  my  Vineyard,  and  the  frnit  of  my  Jiarveji  ,  Jhalt  thou  not' binder.      Thus  vtj  he  cidominia 
brethren  hath  the  Lord  loved  you.  Thus  have  the  Ireafures  of  the  Heavens  opened  tbemfelves  iktto  the  fields. 
ynu  :^  But. your  faith  fpringeth  not.  •  ... 

■  A.  It  fhali  whenitpleafeth  theHigheft  :  We  befeech  him  to  cncreafe  our  faith  as  fhall  be 
moil  for. his  honor  and  glory.  ^  ; 

Avc-i.... .  But  unto  you  it  jhallbe  revsalled,  what  fhall  come,  after;  Marrows,after  T)ayet,Weeks,  Praphefie. 
ittdTrars  :  And  unto  you  it  Jhallbe  deliveredy  Ihe  Prophefit  of  the  time  to  come,  which  is  twelve  :      ^  —  " 
of  t^e  which  you  have  but  one. 
■"'A.  God  make  us  faithful,  true  anddifcretfervants. 

Ave.  ......  For  G-.d  willfhake  this  earth  through  a  riddle,   and,  kjiock,  the  veffels  in  pieces,  throw 

down  the  feats  of  the  proifd,  and  ejiablijh  himfelf  a  feat  ^f  quietmffe  :    that  neither  the  Sun  m"}  j^^ggnm  fuiu- 
Jhine  Upon  t^e  unjufi,  nor  tie  garments  be  made  of  many  piece:.  ■•  jum. 

A.  All  {hall  be  in  unity  :   unm  pajior,unamovile,&.c. 

Ave HiTiie  therefore  and  be  gone  :  as  the  Lord  hath  appointed  you,  that  you  may  be /\,  Be  f^ane  to 

ready  for  him,  when  he  hringeth  the  fichje.     Pur'fie  all  the  veffels   of  your  houfe,  and.  gather  more  the  Empjrour. 
Into  it,(tnd  t^hen  the  Lord  preffeth,he  will  give  you  wine  abundantly  :  And  loytke  ^  forkj  are  weary  '  '  hat  hold  up 
of  their  burdens  :    But  be  dihgent,  watchful,   and  full  of  care  :    for  Satan  himfelf  is  very  bufie  ^^'  g'^pes. 
ifith  you.     After  dinner  I  will  vifit  you  with  inftruftions  ;    But  0  'my  tretbren,  be  faithful  j  4.iid  f ""l^'f^i 
ptrfiverh,^  for  the  fame  fpirit  that  teachsth  the  Church, teachcth  yoi*..  ...  -  spnuus'san- 

•  A;-  Ttrthcfame  Ho/y  Spirit,  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  be  all  honor,  power,  glor^  and^w. 
praife,  now,  and  ever,  J.meH. 


\V,\\     V: 


^^  Julii  i.   After  Noon,  fif«)<r  ^4    .     .  . 

'a.  Gloria  Patri,  ScFilioScSpiritui  Saufto  ficut   erat  in  priAcipio  &:  nunc  &  femper  Sc  in  ..•. 

"iciila  feculomm.     ,4we«. , 

E.  K.  Herehe  is  now.  •-^'^  •, 

.T  .  .      ,~        •        r.  ■  ■  jniM.1 

A.  Nobi^  adlit,  quicunttacreavic-  '    c>'- 

Ave' What  Will  you? 

A.  If  it  bleafeyou,  thefolutionof  the  former  8  quellions  firft.     . 
A.  I,  As  of  the  five  Princes,  which  held  up  the  traine  of  the  Ki|;ig, 

Ave The  kjiowledgeof  them  bilpeth  not  now,  ■  ■ 

A.    2.  Secondly  of  the  Trumpeter,  what  It  betokened. 
Ave... —  It  hath  no-relation  to  thefe  Tables, 

Ji..  5 .  Of  the  letters  in  the  Tranfverfary.,  I  would  know  your  will. 
j~"Ave. ..;...' T/jfjiifrf,  ifj  fJbfoU-er,  but  for  a  peculiar  prafticc.         '     .  ,,  .^  ,;  a.;!,'V  ii.u 

( .  A.  4.   For  Der*p<ipc  and  Tf(/orfKi  referred  diverfly,.  as  I  bave^noted,^  WhtiCil^Le.caafi^f  O""?*;. 
lirlrs  divernty  >  .•...,,.  .  .-  V.-n  .v.vf  -  ■-■^''^'.-^ '•a-'-!^!- --^ '»>^^"* 

Ave It  nT/r^  tiflault  of  E.  it.  in  reporting.  ■ 

A.  What  is  tlie  very.Triith  ?  , 

:.«"'"/^TP,.-..:.'TtoKj:^«/t/'et<r7;g&tt*,rt,Trk«t/&»w  haft  their. Calls,.,  ,,  ;  ^''' 'l  cc 

■^    It  pelongeth  to  NaWngc  his  cerre^ion.   .  ..:..,  .:.'..■■:.      .      ^  .  -'  .coireft. 

A.    5.  As  roncerning  the  Etymologies  of  tlicfe  names  of  God,  we  would  befatiified. 
j-B    Ave,....  God  is  a  Sfirit^and  is  notable  to  be  comprehsjided.  •  ,,j,  ^^.^-^^ 
^■■A.  SoraV Notifying  oirDeclarationj no fuU  coraprelieniion  I r^guirtfo       '^uvv,..m  , --   • 


1 


«8       A  true^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions mthjfirits,  &c. 


hve.....  It  it  no  part   of  mans  mderjiandiHg.     They   fignific  all  things,  and  thcj  fignlfie 
nothing. 

Ave JFbo  can  expreffe  JehoTah  vhat  itfignifietk,    Dcus  fignificat  ad  id  quod  agit, 

A.  As  for  the  form  of  our  Petition  or  Invitation  of  the  good  Angels,  What  fort  fhould 
it  be  of? 

Ave A  (h-jTt  and  brief  [fetch.  - 

•  A.  We  befeech  70U  to  give  us  an  example  :  we  would  have  a  confidence,  it  fliould  be  of 
more  erfeft. 

Ave I  may  not  do  fo. 

E.  K.  And  why  5* 

1  vo-  tion  ■'^^^ Invocation  proceedeth  of  the  ;^ood  will  of  man,  and  of  the  heat  and  fervency  «f  tbe 

fpirit  :    A»d  there  fare  U  prayer  of  fuch  effeS  frith  Goi. 
A.  We  befeech  you,  ftall  we  ufe  one  form  to  all? 
Ave.....  Every  one,  a^ter  a  divers  form. 
A.    If  the  minde  do  diftate  or  prompt  a  divers  form,  you  mean. 

Ave I  kjicwnot  :   for  I  dwell  not  in  the  foul  of  man. 

A.  As  concerning  the  diverficy  of  certain  words  inthefe  Tables,  and  thofc  of  the  portions 
of  the  Earth  delivered  by  N-ilvagey  What  fay  you  ? 

Ave the  Tables  be  true. 

Is  it  Ajdrefl,  or  Andropl  ? 

Ave. Both  names  be  true,  and  of  tneJignificatioH.     Ihave  delivered  jou  tb«  Tables^fo  :tfi 

them, 
\         A.  As  concerning  the  Capital  letters,  have  I  done  well  ? 

Theofc  of  the     Ave Tou  have  eafily  correSedtbat,  and  to  good  endj  for  every  letter,  and  part  oFIetteri 

leqos.  hith  his  fjgnificati.n. 

A.   I  befeech  you  fay  fomewhat  of  the  2V^  in  P<ir^o<i«,   of  which  you  faid,  fo  far  as  that 
Aretchedj  fbould  link  to  hell. 

Ave Every  letter  in  Paraoan,is  a  living  fire  .•  bat  all  of  one  quality  and  of  one  Creation: 

Note.        £,/t  Mnto  ^  is  delivered  a  viol  of  Deftruftion,  according  to  that  part  that  be  it  o/Paraoan  the 
Goveinour. 
A.  It  may  pleafe  you  to  name  that  Place,  City,  or  Country,  under  that  JV. 

Ave A^K^'^lvage^znA  he  will  tell  you. 

A.  As  concerning  the  wicked  here.   Shall  I  call  or  fuhuHon  them  all,  as  I  dothc  good 
ones  in  the  name  of  God  ? 
The  wicked         Ave  .....  Aw  man  calleth  ifqn  the  name  of  God  in  thevicked  :   7bey  are  fervants  and  vile  flaves. 
fpiritsarc  vile      A.We call  upon  the  name  of  Jefusinthe  cxpulfing  of  devils,faying  inthcnameof  Jefus,  d^c, 

(Uvc5.  ^ye j^^j  ]n^  ^  againjithe  wicked.      No  ju'i  man  calleth  upon  the  name  ofGod,to  allure 

the  devil. 

A.  Then  they  are  not  to  be  named  in  the  firft  fummoning  or  invitation. 
Ave Atao  ti'r.e  to  be  called. 

'  ^.  K.  How  then  fhall  we  proceed  with  them  ? 

Ave JFken  the  Earth  lietb  opened  unto  your  eyes,  and  when  the  Angels  of  Light,  fhall  tffa 

thefaffages  of  the  Earthy,  unto  the  entrance  of  jour  fenfes,  (  chiefly  of  feeing  )  Then  fhall  you  fee  the 
•HieTTtx''Mret1'reafttres  of  tbeEartb,zi  JOU  go:  And  the  caves  of  the  Hills  pall  not  be  unkjtswn  unto  you  : 
onheEnih.  Vnto  thefe,you  may  fjy,\t[l'e,  begone.  Thou  artof deflruftionand  of  the  places  of  darkneffe  : 
Our  words  to  Thcfeare  provided  for  the  ufe  of  man,  Sojhalt  thou  ufe  the  wicked,  and  no  otherwife, 
that  "kce"^         ^'  ^^"^  *"  ^^  concerning  the  natural  Minesof  the  Earth. 

Treafure.  ^'^^ Not  ft,  for  they  have  nothing  to  do  viththe  natural  ^Mines  of  the  Eartb,but,witb  tk 

vhich  if  corruptedwitb  ntan. 

A.  As  concerning  the  coined  they  have  power  to  bring  it. 

Ave.  So  they  may  :  that  they  keep,  and  no  other. 

A.  How  fiiall  we  know  what  they  keep,and  what  they  keep  not  ? 

Ave Read  my  former  w.rds  ;  for  tkou  do'i  not  under  t  and  them. 

A.  1  read  it  :   begimiing  at  the  fii-ft  line  on  this  fide,  when  the  Angels  of  Light,  &c. 

A.  I  mean  of  coined  money  that  they  keep  not  5  How  (hall  we  do  to  ferve  our  neceffi-l 
ties  with  it? 

Ave The  good  Angels  are  Miniflers  for  that  purp:fe.      The  Angels   of  the  ^  angles  Jhsi 

tnak^e  the  Earth  open  unto  you,  and  fljall  ferve  your  necejjities  from  the  4  parts  of' the  Earth, 
A.   God  make  me  a  man  of  wifdom  in  aJ]  parts,  I  befeech  him. 

A.    Note  I  had  fpoken  fomewhat  of  my  part  in  VevonJJ.ire  Mines.-    and  of  the  T/i 
Treafures  which  were  taken  of  the  Earth. 
A.  Thefe  cur  Queflions  being  thus  anfwered,  now  I  refer  the  refl  to  your  h&rui. 
intended. 

Invocaticns  to      Ave lou  have  the  corn,  and  yon  have  the  ground  :     Mak^e  you  hut  iTn'ocitions  to   fow  th 

bimadf.  Cccd,  and  the  fruit  Jha  lite  plentiful. 

A. 


>^A true  Relation  ofly.  Dee  his  Anions  mh  fpirits,  ^c-        1 8p 


A.  As  concerning  our  ufage  in  the  4  dayes  in  the  14.  dayes,  we  would  gladly  have  fome 
information. 

Ave ToH  would  kjtow  to  reape,  before  your  corn  be  f own. 

t.   As  concerning  a  fit  place  and  time  to  call,  and  other  circumflances  ,  We  would  learn 
fomewliat. 

Ave Toil  would  kjiowwhere  and  when  to  call,  before  your  invocations  har  witnejfes  of 

your  fcadineffe. 

A.  Then  they  muft  be  written  in  verbis  conceptisy  in  formal  words, 

Ave. I •  a  very  eafie  matter. 

A.   What  is  the  Book  yon  mean  that  I  fhould  write  ? 

Ave.  .....  The  Book.confilieth  [i]  of  Invocation  of  the  names  of  God,  and  [2]  of  the  Angels ,  by  Thi  Book. 

the  names  of  God  :   T'hcir  offices  are  manifeji.     lou  did  defire  to  be  fed  with  fpoones,  andfo  you  are. 

A.  Asconccmm^BataivayorBaataivh,  I  pray  yoa  not  t@  be  offended  though  I  ask  again, 
what  is  the  truth  ? 

Ave The  word  is  hut  of  fix  letter  Sy  whereof ,  one  it  on  the  left  fide,  one  on  the  righty  tm  a-  C^,  He  mean- 

love,  and  two  under  j   A  and  H  are  put  to,  erhof  the  lefe 

A.  Sometimes  or  communiter,  Ay  and  in  extremit  JadiciU  Hats  I  was  taught  before.  ^"^^   °^  *''* 

A.    So  that  the  wosd  is  Bataiva,  or  Bataivh.  '  '^"f^  "n'^"^ 

r      I  1  ,-»  of  the  princi- 

E.  K.  I  think  he  be  gone  i  tor  he  made  a  fign  of  the  croffe  toward  us,  p*'^;°'[-  =  ^°' 
and  drew  the    white  Curtain.  butheteromc' 

■     A.  As  we  fate  a  while  and  talked  of  the  Calls  received  in  the  holy  Language,  and  not  yet 
Engliihed,  there  was  a  voice. 

Tchjhallhave  tbofe  Galls  in  Englifli  on  thurfdaj.    Andfo  ask^me  no  more  queflions.  The  Calls  to 

•■*•     A.  Thanks,  honour,  and  glory,  be  to  our  Creator,  RedeemerjandSanftifierjnow  and  ever,  b=  *>*<!'«  Eb- 

Amen,  glifhonXhurf- 

day  ncKt, 


'  ■*     '  Thurfday,   i  Cracovi£y  Julii,  5.  Mine,  hora,  ^.  fere. 

Oratione  dontinicafinita  aliifque  extemporaneis  ejacitlationibus  ad  I)enmy&  repetito  prowiffo  ul- 
fimorumvirborv.m  de  Angelica  interpretatiene  1^.  illarttm  invocationuniy  quas  a  i^  Maii  ultimi 
recepimusytaniem  appartierunty  Gabri"el  i;j  Cathedra  &  Nalvagc. 

G^^j-if/ in  his  Chair,  zndNalvage  with  the  Table,  or  rather  Globe  with  the  letters  in 
ita^"<:.  . 

A.  Bleffed  be  our  God  alwayes,  for  his  mercies :  his  graces  be  with  us,  now  and  ever. 

E.  K.  G^^rie/ ftandeth  up. 


I        Gab Tittum  eji  f^pe  vobis,  perfeverate  ufquead  finem. 
A.  God  give  us  chat  ability. 
Gab Andwhyii  itfaidfo  ?  but  hecaufe  you  jhall  have  many  temptations  and  affliSlions : 
after  wliich  come  confolation  and  comfort. 

If  th:  Sm  th  prove  and  temper  his  Gold  by  fire,  h'n  intent  is  to  excell  in  the  Wor^  that  he  hath  in 
hand  :  that  threby  it  m/^ht  be  tryedy  refined,  and  made  apt,  to  the  end  wherein  it  jhall  be  ufed  : 
Mtirh  more,  thin\_youy  doth  the  God  of  wifdom,  forge,  try,  and  beat  out,  fuch  as  he  intendeth  to  ufe 
in  the  extent  io?^  of  his  divine  and  eternal  purpofes.  How  therefore  can  you  find  fault  with  the  Lord  ? 
How  can  you  fay,  he  dealethnot  jujily  with  yon?  when  hefufferethyuu  to  he  proved  to  theuttermoji. 
Jf  jou  pay  the  vttermo\l  farthing,  are  you  not  become  free  ?  If  you  feel  affliSion  and  temptation, 
tatdwitkiiand  it,  are  you  not  the  more  pure  ?  the  wore  jujiified  ?  for  the  Vineyard  and  Harveji  of 
the  Lord  ?  0  yes,  my  Brethren  ;  for  the  more  the  wife  man  is  affliUed,  the  more  he  re]oyeeth ; 
Andthegreaierhisadverfityis,themoreheproffereth.  ' 

Is  it  not  written  ?  No  man  Cometh  to  the  Lord  but  he  is  jujiified,  purified,  and  actepted.  Whence 
there  fere  ( if  yon  feek^to  come  before  the  Lord,  that  is  to  fay,  to  appear,  to  be  blejfed)  Jhall  your 
jujiification  or  purifying  arife  ?  Of  your  own  natura  it  cannot  5  for  you  were  born  finners  :  But 
hy  Chrijlyoumay  :  I n  whom  y  ou  are']  uliified,  through  patience,  and  refilling  temptations.  True 
t'  '^-ftoof,  and  touch  of  man  :  But  me  thinkjih  I  hear  ytufay,  O,  if  we  were  rich,  or  of  ability. 
True  it  is,  for  the  dttjl  of  the  earth  many  nien  excel  yoii :  But  inthat  youfpenkvfkh  God,  in  uS 
his  hngekf^  that  is  to  fay  Mejfagers  ) you  are  not  onely  happy  (  which  hafpineffe  the  others  Wtant')  yUedfe^*  i** 
but  ym  excell  all  the  creatures  of  the  Earth.  God.      ^^ 

I  ,    0  my  Brethren,  their  joy  is  a  bitter-fweet  :    But  the  comfort  that  you  have,  is  eternal,  is  fweet, 
1*^?"^  <*  food  for  ever.      There  forey  if  you  will  be  eternal,  and  in  perpetual  comfort  with  joy,  defpife 
■  the  world  fr  the  worlds  fak^e  :   and  delight  in  God  for  his  mercies  ;  which  ifjtu  truly  do,.  Then  can 
|(»w  Tempei  prevail,  no  affliHien  come  antiffe.,  nor  no  burden  be  too  heavy  for  you  :  For  it  ii  written, 
Giudium  beato;  um  eft  Chriftus ;  Cui  Mundus  omnia  mala  fecit. 

O  my  Brethren,  be  contented,  and  fuffer  the  w»r Id:    for  as  Chrijl  in  vanquiflnnghery  did  prove 
'himjelftbe  Son  of  God:  Stjhallyou  in  refijiinghery  at  la^  overcome,  and  be  amounted  the  fans  of 

[bb]  gU 


1  c,  o      'A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions  mthfpirits,  &€, 


""""d^^:       'codinChrilh  of  -^^kom  yon  kre  a  follower,    John  Dee,  be  of  comfort,  for  thou  (halt  overcome, 
A.  Gol  be  praileJ  therefore.  '  ; 

E.  K.  And  what  ^o  you  fay  of  me  ?  : 

A.   If  I  prevail,  Satan  fliall  not  have  his  will  of  you  :  for 

Gab But  unto  thee  [  E.K.  ']faith  th  Lord,Tikc  heed,how  thou  meddleft  with  hell,  left 

it  fvvallovv  thee. 

H'lve  patience^  a  time. 

E.  K.  They  be  gone  out  of  fight. 

t..  In  the  (iiean  time  we  read  oyer  the  premiffes  twice,  to  our  great  Comfort. 

E.  K.   Now  they  be  here  again, 

Now  is  a  Cloud  over  them,  all  white  like  a  fmoke. 

A  voice fjl'iove  not,  for  the  flace  is  holy «  By  a  great  hollow  voice. 

E.  K.  Why  fhoiild  it  be  holy. 

A. — «  The  Courtjs,  where   the  King  is  :   So  where  the  Lord  is  prefent,  the  place  ii 

accounted  holy,  and  is  fo. 

E.  K.  Now  they  be  out  of  the  Cloud. 

- 1^.  After  this,  they  made  another  paufe  :  longer  than  before. 

E.  if.    When  fiiall  we  pradicey^-r/e  his  Calls,  c^c. 

G?.b.  My  brother,  thou  hajl  leafl  care:    Thou draweft both  of  God  and  man.      thatispr*^ 

His  fee  o?  A.l.  mifed  thee,,llntll  he  payed  thee  ;  and  that  which  is  to  come,  thou  Jhalt  be  partaker  of 

of4ooDoUers     f  A.  To  £.  if.  for  he  hath  no  care  neither  for  meat,nor  drink  for  him  and  his,   neither  is 

yearly.  he  difiicuteof  400  DoUers  yearly  peniion,  and  is  to  have  fomehelp  by  Art,  ] 

Nal Say  the-firjl  word  of  the  Call. 

Cak  S  din,         ^-  ^^p'^h        It  isthe  fifth,for  4beingEnglifhcd. 

E.   K.  Heholdethup  all  his  hand,  and     The  spirits  of  the  fonnU 

on  his  thumb  ftandeth  written    ■ :     -^"s'e  are 

and  on  the  fingers  orderly  very  big  letters. 

Ibere  was  no  word  there  that  fignified  Nine,  the  third  wordjhould  he  E  M. 


A.  It  is  yet  a 

myftciy  to 
what  book 
t'nefe,  anJ  fuch 
words  have  re- 
lation,they  arc 
in  every  Call 
following. 


Nine 

mighty 

in  the  firtnament 

of  watersy 

whom 

the  ftrjl 

hath  planted 

a  Torment 

to  the  wickfdf 

and 

a  Garland 

to  the  righteous  ; 

giving  unto  them 

fiery  darts 


to  vanne  the  earth 

and  l''*\T'', 

thou  haft  not, 

7^99  icisilcJm. 

continual  Work^ten, 

whofe  courfes 

vrfit  vf^ith  comfort 

the  earth, 

and  are 

in  government 

and 

continuance 
as  the  fecond 
and  the  third : 


Wherefore 
Hearken  unto 
my  voice, 
I  have  tiilk^ed  ofyeu 

and 

1 7nove  you 

in  power  and  prefence^ 
whofe  work^ 

pall  be  £.K.  Liltea 

a  Song  of  honour  ''°"-*  """«•« 
andthepraife       between  nK& 
r  5-  J  '"^  thincs  in 

of  your  God  the  air, 

in  your  Creation,     A       « 

2, 


Sa^ab. 


Nal.  : That  is 'one. 

E.  K.  Now  he  plucketh  the  Curtain  over  all. 

A.  Becaufe  you  faid  that  Acam  betokening  7699.  was  to  be  put  in  his  place ;  I  have  viewed 
and  numbred,and  I  find  the  words  of  the  Call,raore,than  the  Engli/h  parccl]5,  by  manir :  Foi 
theEnglifh  parcelsare4i,  and  the  Call  hath  above  50.  r  ,    /         / 

,    A  voice.......  Jou  have  OD  the  fourth  word  of  that  Call-,     The  whole  Call  k  placed  tberel 

and  tuiht  to  be  the  next.     Number  the  words  of  the  next  Call,  ^ 

A.  So  that  the  next  Call  ought  to  hare  this  Englilh. 

E.  K,  Now  he  flieweth  again. 


Nal,  .J 


A  true  "Kelathn  of  D\  Dee  his  Jciions  with  fpirits,  &c.        i  p  i 


Nal..  ..Tfcf  mrghtj  fohnds 

have  entered 

into  the  third  Angle, 

and 

are  becoynt' 

af  Olives 

in  the  Olive  Moimt^ 

lockj'tZ  with  c,'adnejfe 
ufon  the'farthj  E.   K, 

and  Clouds, 

*  dwelling  in  the  bright nejfe 
of  the  Heavens 

as 

continual  comforters^ 

unto  whom, 

J  f aliened 

Fillars  of  gUdnefe 


nineteen 
and 


That  is  Af 
that  word 
have  not 
there. 


gave  them 

vtjf.ls 

to  water 

the  earth 

with  her  Creatures, 

and 

they  are 

the  brothers 

of  the  fir \l  •  • 

and  fecondy 

and 

the  beginning 

of  their  own  feats, 

which 

are  garnijhed 

with  continual birningLamp 

6p6^6'  Nal * 


whofe 
numbers 


Peral 

you  want 
thiit  word. 


are  its 
thefirliy 
the  ends 
and 

the  Contents  of  time, 
therefore,        E.    K. Now  all 
Come  ye  the  ftr-.gers  art 

and  lowed    down- 

obey  ward, 

your  Creation,^  , 

vifix  Hi  in  peace 
and  comfort, 
conclude  lu 
as  receivers 
of  their  myjhries, 
for  why  e 

Our  Lord  and  Mujier     A.    5 
if  all  one.  i 


nal  .... 

E  K  Cloud' 
came  between. 
E.K.  His  eyes 
anJ  the  ihcw- 
fionc. 


E  K.  Clouds. 
Forte  Jic. 


*  Dwf  MInp  in 
the  1-r  ghtiv.fle 
of  the  heivens 
as  continual 
comforters. 


Nal that  if  it  that  went  before. 


E.  K.    Now  he  draweth  the  Cur- 
tain. 


Nal 

Th-i'  is  P.  you 
have  n  ir  m»rk 
theroyfteiic. 


A.. I  inderftand  this  tobe  the  Englijh  of  the  fifth  Call;  and  that  before  of  the  fixth: 
the  Numbers  of  the  parcels  feem  to  agree.  So  that  we  have  now  the  Englifti  ./  the  fifth  and 
fixth  Call.     Ihankfd  be  God.  £,  A/,  ^f.  and  Pfoa/,  three  words  which   you  faid  we  had 

not,  1  finde  them  in  the  Calls:  your  meaning  perhaps  is  fomc  other  then   the  common 
words.  , 

E.  K.  Now  he  hath  opened  again. 

A  mighty 

Gujrd 
of  fi  Pj 

with  two  edged  fwords 

flaming', 

which  have 

the  Viols 

eight 

of  wrath 

for  two  times 

and 

a  half, 

whofe 


are 

of  Wormwood, 
and 

of  the  marraw 
of  fait 
have  fetled 
their  feet 
in  the  Weft, 
and 

are  meafured 
with  their  Minijiers, 
■ppp^ 7hatis, 


filiot 


Ihefe             C.-t/^thatyoii 

ufon 

gather  up       have  not. 

their  hands 

the  Mcjfe 

are 

of  the  earth. 

Mtrble 

[lis]  the  rich  man 

fleevfs. 

doth 

Hippy  is  he 

his  treafure. 

on  whom  \ 

curfed 

they  frown  not : 

are  they 

For  why  ? 

whofe 

the  God  of  righteoufnejfe 

iniquities 

rej.yceth 

they  ate. 

in  the>K. 

in  their  eyes 

Come  aWay^ 

are 

And  not 

Milflones, 

yot>r  viols. 

greater 

For, 

then  the  earth. 

the  time 

And 

is  fuch  as 

from  their  mouths 

requireth 

runne 

comfort. 

Seas 

■      ^  I 

ofbloud: 

"their  beads 

are  covered 

E.K.  Now  he  draw- 

with Diamond, 
and 

eth  the  Curtain. 

The  ninth. 


Weft. 


¥ 


L.  As  I  was  comparing  the  Call  to  this  Englip^  a  voycefaid. 

''•*'to ,  It  it  the  next  Call. 

A.  I  underftand  it  to  be  the  fourth  Call,  or 

[b  b    2] 


£.  K.  Now 


:yz 


■iyl  true  T^elation  of  D^^  Dee  his  AUions  mthfpirits,  &c. 


N„./ .... 

Ox.:  AnJ  that 
you  havj  noc. 


E.  A'.   Now  he  opencth. 

unto  the  Harvefi 
ef  a  n'idow. 
H(W  many  are  there 
wh'ch  remain 
in  the  glory 


Ihe  -midday  the  firjly 

ii  CK 

the  third  Heaven 

ryiade 

of  HiachiB  pillari 

■26. 

In  whoyti 

The  Elders 

are 

lecome  ftrangCj 

ifbich    0 

J  have  p-epared 

for  my  own  right  ecu fneffe^ 

faith  the  Lord, 

whofe  long  continuance 

Jhall  he 

as  BuckJ.'s 

to  theftoufing  VragonSi 

and 


this 


ef  the  earth, 

n>kich  are, 

and  jhall  mt  fee 

death  vntifl 

this  hoitfe  A-  I  underhand 

fall, 

and 

the  Dragon 

fink. 

Come  awny. 

For, 

the  Thunders 


the    end     of 
earth,  &c. 


Come  away. 

For, 

the  Crowns 

of  the  Temple  ,     . 

and 

the  Coat 

of  hint,  that  is^  was,  and  Jhall 

he  Crowned 
are  divided. 
Come  ' 
appear 
to  the  terrour 
of  the  earth 
and 

to  our  comfortf 
and  • 

cffucb 

M 

are  prepared 


4 
8 


have  fpokjH : 

E.  K.    Now  he  hath  covered  all  again. 

c.  As  I  was  fpeaking  of  his  diverfities,  faying.  This  you  have  not,  and  this  you  have  not* 
A  voyce  faid  :  Some  you  have,  and  fame  you  have  not,  whether  jou  have,  or  have  hoi,  it  is  a  my- 
ftcry. 

£.  K.  There  is  a  little  fire  in  the  ftone,  going  about  it  like  a  little 

Candle. 

The  Curtain  is  open,  and  a  great  Cloud  over  them. 
Now  they  appear  clear. 

The '  Thunders  of  Judgement  and  wrath. 
of  lament Atiott 
and 


Of',,.... 

That  you  have 

not. 


are 

fiumbred 

and 

are  hif-rlourei 

in  the  North, 

in  the  ti\entffe 

ef  an  Oak.i 

•whofe 

branches 

are 

Neafts 

22. 


01.  That  you 
have  not. 


weeping, 

laid  up 

ftr 

the  earth, 

that 

times 

5678. 

in  the  24.'^. 

parte 


That  is  T)MX 
that  you  have 
noe. 


#/    «  tn$ment 
rear 

with  an  hundred tmb, 

■mighty  Earth-quak.es. 
And 

a  Thoufand r— v-  Math. 

(urges 

which 

re(i  not  {jDr"]  lahtur  fiilly 

tteitber 

know. 


E.  K.    Now  Cometh  a  Cloud  over  them  very  white  like  fmoke. 
Now  they  appear  again. 


Which 

burn 

flight 

and 

day. 

And 

vomit  out 

the  heads 

of  Scorpi<^ns, 

and 

live  Sulphur, 

mingled 

•with  foyfon. 

Thefe  he 


the  Thunders 

any 

time 

here. 

One  rtcK 

bringeth  out 

a  thoufand  — 

even  as 

the  heart 

of  mau 

doth 

his  thoughts, 

wo,Wo,we, 

Wi,TtO,WO, 


Nal...... 

hUth.  you 

have    it 

not. 


Tea, 

•wo 

he  to  the  earth, 

for 

th 

her  iniquity 

^> 
•was, 

andfhallhe 

great. 

Come  away. 

But 

mt  • 

your  noyfes. 


6 

10 


XKieje  ce  ■    3-  -d-  •  j 

E.  K.  Now   the  Curtain  is  drawn  again,  after  a  quarter  of  an 
•^;^"'*  E.  if.  Now 


J  true  Relation  of  jy.  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  fplrits,  (5cc,      15)3 


E.  K.  Nowhe  appcarcth. 

Nal Confider  Ij  thtffjirhofe biiftiifjfe  joii  have  in  hand. 

0  you 
thdt  ra)igr 
in  the  Souths 
and 


of  forrow 

hinde  up 

your  gird/eSy 

and 

Viftt  iii. 

Bring  down  amongf}  yo»  A    8 

your  train 

lUre  wiiji  ycordi  in  the  end  of  the  firji^al!,  follow  at  Move^&c. 

A.  Bi;c  this  Call,  ic  diffcrcth  a  little  exprefly, 

A.  They  are  die  14  laft  vvords»  in  the  holy  langirage  thus :  Zacar  e  ca,  od  zamran  ,  odo  ic. 
Qiia,  Zovge,  lap  zirdo  Noco  Mad,  Hoath  Jaida, 


are 
2S. 
the  Linterns 


Oh 

Thit  )OU 
hive  not. 


3663. 

that 

the  Lord 

may  he  vtagnified^ 

whofe  name 

amonglt  you 

ii  wiathjd^c. 


yiian.. 


Another * 

"the  mighty  feat 

grcanedy 

and 

there  were 

thunders 

5- 

which 
flew 

into  the  Eaj}^ 
and 


and 

cried  with  a.  loud  voyce 

Csme  away 

and 

they  gathered   them- 

0. felves  together 

and^  ^, 

,  There  is  no 

became  ,     i,ng,„g,  f^r 

the  honfe  thefc  words  in 

of  deaths  jhsCall. 

sffchom 


7 


the  Eagle 

Note,     then  begin  at  the  firjlCally  Move,  as  before. 

E.  K.  Now  they  appear. 


it  if  iveafuredy 
and 
it  ifOi 
they  are 
whofe 
Number 
.  «■ 
31 , 

Com  J  away. 

For 

I  prepare  ~-r—  ^ 


Ga. 


fory 


on. 


Gabr. 
orjhave  pre- 
pared. 


0  thou 

the  governoj^r 

ef  the  fir>i  flame 

under  whife 

wings 

are 


6739. 

which  weave 
the  earth 
with  drinejfe, 
which 
kjiow  of 


the  great  name 

RighteoufneflTe, 

and 

the  [eat  L 

of  Honour 


II 
15 


Ih  me^e.:  Wednef- 
day^  fnXii  u.  dixit 

hie  deefi. 

Of  the  firft  flame. 


Nal Then  move  <wie/orf,&c 

Oyotifons  Sons, 

of  ff^ry.  Daughters. 

the  daughters 


At  Urge. 
Darg...... 

Of  the  fifft 
flame. 


ef  the  juji, 

which 

fit 

OH 
24 

feats 


Nal., 
01.., 


.,  Move,  as  before. 


Oyoufwords 
of  the  South 
which  have 
42 


-Ux. 


Nalvage. 


eyes 

to  jiir  up 
the  wrath 
of  fin. 


vexing 
all  ceatures 
of  the  earth 
v/ith  age 
which  have 
umer  you 
i6-}6. 
Behold^ 


tuahjng 
men  drunken 
which  are 
empty. 
Beholdy 
the  promife 
of  God 


Nat.... 


the  voyce 
of  Gody 
the  promife 
of  him 

which  «■  called 
am$ngii  you 
Furie 


Nal 

—  or  ex tr earn 
-Juftice. 


A   1.0 


and 

hit  power^ 

which 

is  called 

amongiiyou 

A  bitter  fling; 


A 

9 
»3 


.  Move,  as  before,  Sec. 

K.  Now  all  is  covered. 


E.  K. 

fO  thou  mighty  light, 
and  burning  flame  of  comfort 
which 


Now  it  is  open  again. 

epeneji 
the  glory 
of  God 


to  the  Center 
of  the  earthy 
In  whom 


•'>*f 


thi 


V 


194      ^  true^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  ABions  wh)f^s,^:x^  ^ 


Eran 


l^  This  is  t>»e 
14    as  1  re- 
ceived ih'-m  'n 
the  ho'y  Lan- 


ti'f  ffcrf ti  c/  "truth 
6332 

tb.'ir  ahidini 


vbich 


Move   as  before. 


Faxs  — 

to  be  foiinil-d. 
1  find  in  tne 
Call  T.-is.  1 
finde  alfo  '" 
fo.ne  ".vords  T 
or  F  inditfcr- 
cnth  ufed, 

LA.  13  1 

['7j 


0  thou 

fecmi  flawfy 

'the  hovfe  of  Jujiite 

■K>hi:h 

hail: 

th  legmiyig 

hi  ft'ory^ 
aitd 

hlovei  8ic. 


it  called. 

in  thy  Kingdom 

JOY, 

and 

ff'ah  comfort 
'the  Juji, 
v^l}ich  wa/kfli 
en  the  eurtb 
■with  feet  • 

87^3       — 

that  undcrjland 

and 


Eniod. 


not  to  be  meafured- 
Pe  thou 

a  ■frindoff  of  comfort 
unto  me. 


feparate 

Creatures 

great 

art 

thou 

in  the  god  of 

end  Conquer-^ 


i8 


Stretch  forth 


E.  K.  Thry  have  covered  all  witif  the  Curtain 


NOTE. 


NOTE. 


0  thou 

third  famei 

whofe 

wing! 

are 

thorns 

to  jiir  up  . 

A  voice. 


Tj^xition 
and  h'iji 

7336 

L  iiTfps  living 

-goin; 

be  fire  tjefy 

Move-i  as  lefoTe-,  &c. 

Vpn  Mifidijyort  'hall  tjJve  the  refi. 


ffih:fe  God 

is  Wraih  in  Anger, 

Gird  up 

thj  lojnes 
nnd 

heark^en. 


A.  Tiie  Goi  o:  Hofts  hi  praifed,  his  name  extolledj  and  his  verity  prevaU  to  the  comfort : 

ofhisLleft.     Amen 

^  voice I'ie  Eternal  Cod  hleffeyou.      We  have  no  more  nov.  \ 

A.  Amai,  Amen,  Amen.  Mora  12. 

A.  Upon  my  coniidering  (  immediately  )  of  thefe  EngliOied  Ca^ls,  and  the  Ahgelical  Lan- 
cTua^e  bslongiiig  to  them,  I  find  tnat  here  are  but  13  Engiifhed  of  the  14  wWich  are  in  the 
third  Cracovien  Vol-ime  contained  :  and  here  wanteth'thc  Englilh  of  the  thirdofthofe  14. 

Beiides  this, you  may  conlider  that  tliefe  Englifh  Calls  keep  this  order  as  foUowech  :    and - 
to  make  it  a  more  peifeft  account  from  the  beginning  ot  the  firil  Call  of  All  (  being  longfincc 
En<'liihed,  and  three  more  )  Then  have  vve  18  Calls,*  whereof  17  are  Engli/hed.  ,^ 

■  \'M 


Note  ,  the  third  of  the 
third  Book,  which  is  the 
fev£r-th5from  the  be;3in- 
ning  ,  is  not  yet  tng- 
lifhed. 

Vidffojl  Julii  II.  kora  4. 
There  is  the  Call  Eng- 

liftied, 


i; 


Tr,,  there  lack  ycr  =0  Calls,  for  the  30  Aires,  &c.  (  befides  the  Englifh  of  the  feventh  or 

third^in'r^^^^^^^  '^'  fi-"^  l^^\'' 

110  clw  :    A;  chough xherc  be  letters  gathered,  but  made  into  no  words ;  as  you  may  fee,  be- 
fore the  fivJl'^allSf  ail.  Saturday, 


<^J  true  1{elatiorj  q/I>7D^^  jmcns  mtb  fpkiti^,        T^^ 

Saturday,  Jtdii  7.  hUnc  hortt  G  \     \  Cracoviie. 
;      Oratione  Dominica  finita,  aiiilqiie  tarn  ad  Deumquani  ipfnrn  Ave  petitionlbus,  requirebara 
Judicium  ipfius  Ave  de  meis  tam  ad  Dciini  quani  boiios  ejus  angeios  faftis  orationibus.     Poii 
>13{  qi'rartL''n v^otz  partem  apparuic. 
.-;    Ave........  if  the  -fi^ords  or  truth  of  onr  tefihmny  and  rttef.ige,  were,  or  were  contained  within  the 

capa<^t\  of  wany  then  might  the  Devil  thrui  in  hintfelf,  and  dijfemble  the  Image  of  Truth  :     But 
.  becnufeit  is  of  Iruth^  and  of  him  that  beareth  teftimonj  of  himfelf,  tt  can  neither  have  affinity  with 
tiji'fielh,nor  be  ft'oksnof  inthis  fenfe. 

Lo)  tbUi  deceitfully^  ^  "'•'  '^^  Devil  entred  into  man. 

A:   Bkiled  b^  the  Lord  of  all  truth. 

Ave, Therefore  feeing  the  word  is  not  cornipihle,  Thofe  that  mlniller   the  word,  canntt 

dwell  in  corruption.         If:  eak^  not  thii,  without  a  cavfe,  my  brethren. 

A.  1  pra}'  you  to  proccedj  accordiiifjly,  that  we  may  know  the  caufe,  if  it  be  your  will  :  or 
elfe  leaving  thi:;  Caveat  un:o  uj,  to  proceed  to  the  matter  wherein  we  required  your  help- 
ing hand  to  corrcft  or  confirm,  or  to  do  that  which  is  behooful. 

Ave fsr,  which  ■-fjon  havefagbt  the  Lord,  for  the  Lordhis  caufe  orfa^e  -<* 

A.  Thar,  God  can  be  judge. 

Are Or  inwhuh  of  you  hath  due  obedience  ;  either  to  the  word  ,  or  unts  us  that  are  fan- 
Si  fie  ct  hy  the  word,  been  fuithfiil'y  performed  ? 

A.  My  points  of  crrour,  and  difobcdience  I  befeech  you  to  Notifie,  that  I  may  amend 
'them. 

Ave It  may  he,yo"  will  [ay,  wc  havi  laboured,  and  we  have  watched,  yea  we  have  called  on 

the  name  of  the  Lord,     trhat  have  you  dune  that  yo:i  ought  mt  to  do  ,  yea,    a.  thovfand  times 
more  ?  ' 

A.  We  vaunt  nothing  of  any  our  doings,  nor  challenge  any  thing  by  any  perfeftion  of  our 
doings. 

Ave,  ShaU  the  hireling  fay,  I  have  laboured  bard  ?  er  doth  the  goodfervant  think^he  merit- 

eth  his  wages  ?    It  is  not  fo       But  you  do  fo;  Therefore  you  are  neither  worthy  af  your  reward^ 
tier  the  name  of faiihful  fervants. 

A.  No  Lord,  we  challenge  nothing  upon  any  merits;  but  flie  unto  thy  mercy,  ant^thaC 
Vie  crave  and  call  for, 

Ave lou  do  wickedly  andinjullly  :  yea  you  credit  the  Lord,   as  you  do  your  felves  :   your 

faith  U  the  faith  of  wen,  and  not  of  the  faithful. 

Many  things  have  I  [aid  unto  you  from  the  beginning,  (  faith  the  God  of  Jujiice  )  which  yoit  have 
heard,  and  not  believed  :  Butyoutempt  me  ,  and  provol{e  me;  jea  you  jiir  me  uptobe  angrj 
ivith  yriu 

•    A,  If  thy  Anger  fhall  be  on  us,  befide  the  forrovv  of  this  world ,tentations  of  the  femd,  &c. 
Xhen  are  we  not  able  to  endure. 

A'tfifcr  not  me,  and  hear  what  the  Lord  faith  nnto  thee  ;     Satan  laugheth  you  te  fcorn  •  fvr 

llifpif^  unto  the  Lord,  ftanding  before  him.     Are  thefe  they  whor^  thou  deliveredji  from  i'&^  The  great  and 
perils  of  the  Scar,  and  from  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  who}a  the  windes  were  a  comfort  to,   and  %peculiir  mer- 
jP'.imt?nance  a  Laii'hdPn  ?     ButtheLordjeemethnottohearhim.-forhekjioweth  it  is  true.     My^'^*  of  God 
brethren,  you  leek  the  world  more  than  you  feek  to  perform  the  will  of  God  :    as  thmgh  God  '^»*^*^  °n  "*• 
could  not  rain  Gold  and  M-irgarits  amom,ji you  :  As  though  the  breath  of  Goi  were  not  able  to  beat 
'd'>wn  the  whole  earth  before  you.     0  you  faithlejfe  Creatures  :   0  ye  hypocrites  in  the   Vineyard  of         ' 
the  Lord:  0  you  unworthy  fervants  of  fuch  a  M'ljhr.     Neither  unto  A\^r3ham,  nor  unto  Noe, -nor 
nnto  any  other  Patriarchs  or  Prophets,  hath  God  done  more  merciful  unto,  than  unto  yo>f.     To  A  bra-  , 
h^rahe  [aid.  When  I  return  at  this  time  of  the  year.,  Thou  jhalt  ha-ye  a  fon.     Vnto  Noe  he  fa  id  ^ 
Build  thee  a  Ship  :   Mnkj'  up  the  Aik,  Thus  and  thus., it  (hall be  :  for  the  people  jhall perijh. 

Tofi  remember  not  that  Jofcph  was  fold  by  his  brethren ;  or  if  you  do,  it  may  be,  you  think^  it  is  a  Gsnsf.  17. 
fable  :  If  you  thinly  it  to  be  true.  Then  confidsr  how  he  efcaped  the  Pit ;  Confider  he  was  fold,  and 
fo  hecame  a  bondman:  B'ft  who  changed  the  imagination  and  fenfe  of  h:s  brethren?  who  Q  I  fay") 
came  between  their  Tj/ranny  an'J  h:i  innocency?  fVhat  w,ts  he  that  made  him  free?  that  brtHght 
hi»i  before  Pharaoh  ?  yea,  and  that  which  if  more,  made  him  reign  over  Pharaoh  :  Was  it  not 
the  fame  God,  thatdealeth  with  you? 

0  ye  of  little  faith,  and  jrarvelings,  withered  grajfe,  and  hla-lted  willoy^fs  :  What  and  if  you 
vere  in  hell,  conldhe  not  deliver  you  ?  If  you  become  bondmen,  cannot  he  makj  you  free  ?  If  you 
ie  in  prifon, cannot  he  deliver  you  ?  Cannot  he compafTeyoih- neck  with  a  chain?  But  Satan 
faith,  Lo,  rtiey  fay,  they  have  a  long  Journey  ;  It  is  necejfary  that  God  comfort  thofe  that  put 
'their  truli  in  him.  Euge,  0  ho  O  yon  begzerly  frarvelings.  Hath  not  the  fame  God,  the  fame 
Raphael  that  he  had.  .  .  Tes  verily,  a  tkouftni  a  hundred^  and  a  thovfand  and  a  hundred  thoufand 
thoufands  that  are,  and  more  than  Pv.aphael  for  the  help  and  comfort  of  the  faithful. 

TFhen  Herod  fought  to  kill  the  fon  if  God,  in  that  he  was  man:  hii  Father  delivered  him  not 
with  a  mighty  wind,  nor  with  beating  down  of  Lords  Palaces;  i«t  by  a  dream  appeared  ««f(? 
Jofeph,  faying,  flee,  Herod  feek^eth  the  child  his  life,     flote  the  manner  of  his  warning.  The  man- 

iiii- 


»> 


6       A  tmel^elatton  of  D'.  Dee  his  Anions mthjfirits,  &c. 


Iter  of  kk  departure  :     But  hear  what  the  Lordfaid  in  the  end.      Return,  for  he  that  fought  the 
Child  hii  [lie,  u  now  dead.     Why,  I  f^y,  you  rotten  Keeds,  worfe  than  the  excrements  of  the  Fens, 
Ud  anJ    be     have  not  yov  greater  warning?    Jibber  ef^^re  it  it  (aid  unto  you.  Up  and  be  gone,  hut  that  the  Lord 
feon.-.  feeth  the  thouglus  of  man  >  even  of  him  which  feeketh  your  deftruftion  ;  Even  of  this  wickedj 

-f''f<""''^y*«' King  which  feeketh  todeftroy  L<ziii^if.  "  ! 

Could  not  the  fame  Lord,  cotiftme  that  wicked  monfter  and  feller  of  his  people,  (  which  tartl- 
et h  for  a  tine')  with  the  fire  of  hit  m  uth  ?     Tes,  but  that  he  hath  given  all  things  a  time.     Thofei 
^  ,      fhiit  are  righteom  are  often  ti'tiestak^n  away  hecajife  of  temptations  that  are  to  Cytne  :     But   the^ 
d.-^h  *of'  liic  ^i''k;d  are  fvfered  to  continue.,  becaufe  they  jaight  he  more  heavy,  and.  fink,  deeper  :   But,  (  for  love) 
rigl-.f-^us  now  I  f^'t  urtoyort,  my .' rethren,  P'lee  the  niifchiefs  that  are  to  come,  aud  go  forward  in  the  fervice  of 
a.i>l  then.  the  '  Higheji,  that  you  may  enjoy  thefroniifes  that  are  made  yon,  and  bepartak^ers  of  the  haj>py  dayes 

fl<:=-  to  come. 

Takeheedof  whoredom,  and  the  provocations  of  the  flefh.     For  why  .?  thofe  things  that  we 
But  ic-  Jjyes.  fay,  are  not  wiboiit  thtir  cauje.        To'.i  b^ive  but    ten  dayes  to  tarry  (  if  you  will  follow  my  c»unfe!  ) 
But  if  you  liiigei  any  longer,  you  may  drink,  of  a  C'lp  thit  you  wo-ild  not,     JFberefore  doth  God 
warn  you,  bvt  that  he  would  be  juft  with  you  ?   Hith  he  not  the  while  Earth  tt  ferve  him  ?  Believe 
vie,  by  thete;ti:»ony  We  if  jr,  thac  the  good  Angels  weep  over  )0'< ;  for,  as  you  are  particular- 
Particular       ly  called,  fo  have  you  your  particular  and  unaccuftomed  temptations.    But  pray  unto  God,  that 
Tsmptitions.  jj^  y^^y  prevail.    Nititur  enim,  omnibus  modi?,  Sathanas  ut  vos  devorer. 
Piovide  for        ^^  if  [aid  imtr  you.  If  you  provide  for  this  Journey,  &c.  That  word  is  ais  fure  as  the  ftron"- 
tnisjoirney.    eft  rock  in  the  World.      Confileringthat  you  were  warned  by  the  fame  Spirit  (whereof  I  fpea>^) 
SfiTuus  ian-    heingwitneffe  of  himfelf,  andhy  m,whichhearwitneffe  of  him  t,  Give  ear,  gird  up  yo^r  fe'ves,  and 

iti^i.  begone;  Forycven  at  the  very  doors,  are  mifcbief.     After  n  while  I  have  femewhat  elfe  to  fay 

oe  eon;.  Jr  i  j  j 

°  unto  you. 

E.  K.  He  covercth  all  with  the  white  Curtain. 

A,   We  read  and  con'idered  thefe  premifes  fomewhat  diligently. 

A.  Afterward,  [^Ave"]  he  came  again,  and  (  after  a  paufe  )  faid  as  followetb. 

Ave  My  I  rather,!  fee  thou  di  i  not  underf  and  themylieryofthisBook^,orwork,  thouhafiin 

Enoch.         hand  ButI  told  thee,it  was  the  knowledge  that  God  delivered  unto  Enoch.  Ifaid  a!fo,that  Hnocli 
lab-iited  5c  dayes.     Notwithjiandittg,  that  thy  labour  he  not  frujirate,  and  void  of  fruit ,  Be  it  un^ 
The  Book  con-  to  thee,  as  thou  haft  done. 

""^  ■'  A.  Lord  I  did  the  beft  that  I  could  conceive  of  it. 

Ave. I  will  tell  thee,  what  the  labour  of  Enoch  was  for  thofe  fifty  dayes^ 

L-   O  Lord  1  thank  thee. 

Nal.  Avt.  It  H^  made,  (as  thou  haji  done,  thy  book.)  Tables,  of  Serp^fati  aud  plain  fione  :  as  the  Angel  ef 
15  1  kinJ  of  xhe  Lord  appointed  him  ;  faying,  tell  me(0  Lord)  the  number  of  the  dayes  that  I  Jhall  labuur  itt. 
flne.ftone.       ^^  ^,^,  anfwered  him   5o. 

btur.  ^^"^^  ^'  Then  he  groaned  within  himfelf,  frying.  Lord  God  the  Fountain  of  true  vifdom,  thou  that  open efi 
thefecretsofthyownfelfunto  man,  thou  k?  T^'^i  mine  imperfe^iion ,  and  mji  inward  darkjifjfe  : 
How  can  I  (  therefore  )  fpeak,  unto  them  that  fpeak.  not  after  the  vtice  tfmm  ;  or  worthily  call  on 
thy  nam',  confiering  th^t  my  imaginatnn  n  v  triable  and  fruit leffe  ,  and  mkjiown  t«  my  felf  .<' 
Shall  the  Sundsfeem  to  ia\itc  the  (fountains :   or  can  the  fmall  Rivers  entertain  the  wonderful 

Enich  h's        and  unknown  waves  ? 

prayer  to  GoJ,  Can  the  Vfffel  of  fear,  fragility,  -r  that  ;V  of  a  determi-red  proportion,  lift  up  himfelf,  heave  up 
his  h'tnd!,  or  gather  the  Sun  into  hii  bofom  ?  Lord  it  cannot  be  :  Lord  my  imperfection  ts  great : 
Lord  I  am  leffe  thanfand  :  Lord,  thy  good  Aa^els  and  Creatures  ex  e'l  me  far  :  our  proportion  is 
mt  alike  ;  lur  fenfe  agreeth  not  :  JV  twithihnding  I  am  comforted  ;  For  that  we  have  allcte  God, 

One  Crcirour/z//  one  bes,inningfrom  thee,  that  w-  refpea  thee  a  Creitour  :     Therefore  will  I   call  upon  thy 

of  all  things,    name,  and  in  thee,  I  will  become  mighty.     Thou  fhalt  light  me,  and  I  will  become  aSccr; 
"'•  1  will  fee  thy  Creatures,  and  will  m<ignilie  tliee  amongft  them.     T'.'ufe  that  come  uifto  thee  hate 

the  fame  gate,  and  through  the  fame  ^are,defcend,fuch  as  thou  Cendiii.  Behy'd,  I  offer  vij  houfe, 
wy /fio/T,  wy^f(?>-ttf«<//o«/.  If  ic  will  pleafe  thy  Angels  to  divell  with  m;,  and  I  with  them; 
to  rejoyce  withtne,  that  I  may  rejoyce  with  them  ;  to  minifter  unto  me,  that  I  viay  magnifie 
thyname.  Then,  h  the  Tables  (which  1  have  provided,  and  according  to  thy  will,  prepared)  [ 
offer  unto  thee,  and  unto  thy  holy  Angels,  dcHring  them,  in  and  through  thy  lioly  names  ; 
That  as  thou  art  their  light,  and  comforteji  them,{o  they,  in  thee  will  be  my  light  and  comfort. 
Lord  they  prefcribe  not  laws  unto  thee,  fo  it  is  not  meet  that  I  prefribe  laws  unto  them  :  What  it 
pleafeth  t^ee  to  offer,  they  receive  ;  So  what  it  pleafeth  them  to  offer  unto  me,  will  I  a^fp  receive. 
Behold  I  fay(0  Lord)  Jf  /  fhallcall  up  n  them  in  thy  name,Be  it  unto  me  in  mcrcy,as  unto  the  fer- 
vant  of  the  Higheji.     Let  them  alfo  manifeft  unto  me.  How,  by  what  words,  and  at  what  time, 

The   Call  of  I  Ihall  call  them,     0  Lord,  L  there  any  that  meafure  the  heavens,    that  is  mortal .?    Hw,  there 

Argds.  fore,  can  t^^e  heavens  enter  into  mans  imagination  .<'  Ihy  Creatures  are  the   Glory  cf  thy   covnte- 

tianre  :    Hcnly  \boH  glorifieji  all  things,  which  Glory   excelleth  and  (0  Lord.)  is  far  r.bove  rny 
underjiandmg.     It  is  great    wifdom ,    to    fpeak.  and  talkie   accordi>tg    to   underiiimding  with 


I         (^  true  Relation  of  &,  D^e  his  Miens  mth  fi^irirs,  ^c        2  03 


LIBRI   CRACOVIENSIS    MYSTICUS 
APERTORIUS, 

fulii,  11.  1^84, 

PRi^TEREA    PROOEMILIM   M  ADI  Ml  ANU  M, 

Libri  primi^   fragenfis  Cxfareique^   Anno  i^S/^. 
Auoujii  1 5 .  Stilo  No'vo. 


Liber  5.  Cracovienjiufft    Myjleriorum    Apertorius. 
Thurfdaj,  Julii  12.  Annt  1584. 


ARRY 


to  the  povidenct 


Yar  ry. 


A.  Note  the  w'tcked  power  dazeled  fo  the  eyes  of 

£.  &.  that    he  could  not  well  difceru  this  O,  but 

ID'^'UlGO     *0      ftaying  at  it  a  while  concluded  it  to  be  ail  V  :  which 

afterward,  and  by  and  by,  he  correfted. 

of  him  that  fitteth  on  the  holy  Ihrofte        Id  ui-go. . 

Idoigo. 

The  Curtain  being  plucked. 

lie Have  Patience. 

A.  As  we  were  talking  of  the  name  of  God  Idoigo  in  Enoch  his  Tables,  a  voice  faid. 

A  voice IFhere  the  moji  force  was,  the  Devil  crept  moji  in.        Herein  the  Devil  thought  t« 

deceive  ym.  •      .  Vi 


A.  It  muft  be  then  1  doigo  ? 

*■   OD                      ,, 

ani 

Od. 

JOR2ULP 

rofe  up 

Tor  zulp. 

^  lAODAF 

in  the  beginning 

Y 

la  6  daf. 

GOHOL 

faying. 

Go  hoi. 

CAOSGA 

The  earth. 

Caofga. 

T ABAORD 

let  her  bt  governtd 

Ta  ba  ord-        O 

SAANIR 

by  her  parti  ^ 

Sa  a  nil". 

OD 

and 

.  Od. 

i      CHRISTEOS 

let  there  he- 

Chris  te  ois. 

,VrpoiL 

divifion 

Yr  p6  il. 

1     JIOBL 

in  her. 

Ti  obi. 

f fiUSDIRT I  LB 

that  the  glory  of  her 

Bufdirtilb. 

'. 

NOALN 

204      A  true  Relation  o/D^ ,  Dee  his  JBions  mth/pirits,  &c. 


NOALN 
PAID 
ORSBA 
OD 

DODRMNZ 
ZYLNA 
ELZAPTILB 
P  ARMGI 
PIRIPS AX 
OD' 
TA 


Maybe 
alwayei 
drunks» 
and 

vexed 
in  itfelf. 
Hef^  courfe. 
Let  it  run 
with  the  Hetivtnsf 
*nd 


Q\X  R  L  S  T  in  handmaid. 

11. ......  Have  patience  a  little.  E.  K, 

E.  K.  Now  they  are  here  again. 

BOOA  PIS 

LN/BM 

OUCHO 

SYMP 

OD 

CHRJSTEOS 

AGTOLTOR  N 

M7RC 

:cL. 

TIOBL 
LEL 

TON 

P AOMBD 

D  I  L  Z  M  O 
ASPlAN 


No  aln. 
pa  id. 
Orfba. 

OA. 

Dodrumni. 
Dod  rm  ni. 

Zyl  na. 

El  zap  tilb. 

Farm  gi. 

te  rip  fax. 

Od. 

Ta. 

Kurlft. 
Qurlft. 


Let  her  ferve  them 

B  09  apis. 

one  feafon : 

Lnib  m., 
Chofe. 

Let  it  confomd 

0  V  Cho. 

another^ 

Symp. 

and 

Od. 

let  there  he 

Chris  tc  OS, 

no  Creature 

A  g  tol  torn. 

Mirk. 

upony 

Mire. 

*r 

CL 

within  her 

Ti  ob  1. 

the  fame 

Lei. 

one  and  the  fame. 

All 

Ton. 

her  members 

Pa  Onibd, 

let  them  differ 

Dil  zmo. 

in  their  qualities^ 

As  pi  an. 

''HE  fWol 

.■11    ' 
'3" 


6 
t 

t 


) 
i 


.t 


■K    t 


045 


Aj^V'C  ^dation  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBicns  with  fpirits,  <5cc,  ^ipp. 


VVednefday,  Julii  n.   i  Meridicy  hot  a  4. 

A.  Ac  the  firft  looking  the  Curtain  appeared  to  E.  K.  his  light. 

A.   When  it  (hall  pleafe  thee,  O  God,  we  are  deliious  to  receive  wifdom  from  thee. 

A.   At  fix  of  the  Clock  appeared  a  little  one,  yellow,  like  a  little  Childe  :  his  hair  fine  yel- 
low, and  a  very  amiable  face.  t{A^  '-f  ■         notp 

Tt  avoid  rfproachy  and  ''or  the  truth  of  the  word  I  viftt  jiw^inftead  o/Nalvage  ,  Mich  can»'-t    i.^}f^  ' 
come.  I  afti  I\c  Mefe,  thefervant  of  the  higheft,  which  injiead  c/Nalvage,  wi//,  and  am  able  to  fitf-  ^  '^^^  f^'  ^^^ 
fljhiifJ^cc.  ^  of>^.//«'>,Dd, 

A.  s>o  belt  in  the  name  of  Jefi:s.  oneofchesep- 

llcm (JHany  ,andj:rong  are  your  enemies,  both  bodily  and  ghoflly  :  But  he  you  flrongy  '^"=»"'  vvhere- 

and  you  (hall prevui'.  '     ^^   "  •'* 

Many  enemies         -f^^^^^y^^^  f,y^  what  you  will  have  nte  do. 

A.  That  (if  ic  pleafe  you)  that  Nalvage  would  have  done. 
The  Eaji  u  a  houfe  of  Virgins. 

A,   He  diftinguifheth  it  not  by  fingers. 

He lFell,youJhall have  fingers.  ' 


bodily  and 
gholHy. 


are 

1  he  Trinfla" 

tion  ot  ihe 

Call  inco 

Englifh. 


Singing  fraifes 

*nto*tgji 

the  flames  of  firft  gl  oric, 

wherein 

the  Lord 

hath  opened  his  mouth 

and  j^^ 

they  are  become         ^ ^•■* 

Twenty  eight         That  you  have 

living  dwellings,     not. 

in  whom 

the  jirength  of  man 

rejoyceth. 

and 

they  are  apparail'd 


with  ornaments  fo  bright 
fuch  as 

jpsri^  wonders 
,  en  all  creatures, 
whofe 
Kingdoms 
and  continuance 
are  as  the  third 
and  fourth 
fir»ng  Towers 
and  , 

places  «f  comfort. 
The  feat  of  mercy 
and  continuance. 
Oyoufervants  of  mercy. 


(JHove, 

appear, 

fing  praifes 

unto  the  Creator, 

and 

be  mighty 

amongji  us, 

for 

unto  this  remembrance 

is  given 

power, 

and 

our  ftrength 

waxethftrong 
in  our  comforter. 


lie. .... ..  Lo,  there  jiu  have  it, 

A.   I  pray  you  to  confider  of  the  form  of  the  promifc,  for  we  were  promifed  to  receive  the  Vide  Supra. 
Calls  we  looked  for,  and  Co  to  be  fit  for  the  49  Gates,€^c.         If  this  you  have  done,  be  the 
performance  of  thofe  the  words  of  Gabriel,  or  no,  I  pray  you  confider. 

lie. .....  For  tht  thirty  Culls,  or  thirtyCall,  to  morrow  4t  the  fourth  benr,        Thutfday  at  four  of 

/  will  eafeyo'i  fifficiently.  t^e  Clock  afcernoon. 

A.  I  befeechyou  (if  I  (hall  not  offend  to  rcqueft  it)  What  is  the  caufe  e/ Gabriel  and  Nal- 
vage their  abfence  f 

He Spiritual  Contention  between  Satan  and  them,  and  more  then  man  can,    or  may  un- 
der ji  and.  '     •!' 

A.  Then  I  pray  you,  why  was  not  this  fupply  fent  at  the  time  appointed? 

lie It  is  not  of  God,  to  thinks  that  God  is  of  time.      All  things  are  tied  unto  him  ,   and  no- 

thing  can  be  feparated  from  him.         NotwithjiandiHg,he  may  feparate  himfelf  from  them.    But  you -HiazKcn 
/hall  understand,  that  thcfe  nineteen  Calls.  Calls  re- 

A.  There  arc  but  18  befides  the  firft  to  God,  «''«<*• 

There    are  nineteen  befides  the  firji']  are  the  Calls,  or  entrances  into  the       The  ufe  of  ihels 

knowledge  of  the  myftical  Tables  :  Every  Table  containing  one  whole  leaf,     *9  Calls. 
whereunco  you  need  no  other  circumftances. 

.\t.  The  fii-jl  Call  begiiketh  OlSonf. 

In  Englifti  /  raign. 

2.  The  fecond  beginneth  Adgt. 

In  Englifli  Can, 

3.  The  Call  of  the  third  Table  beginneth  Ol^icma. 

In  Engli/h  "  Behold. 

E.   K.  A  white  cloud  cometh  about  him,  but  hideth  him  not. 

lie But  you  muji  under'land.that  infpeakjng  of  the  firft  Table  ,  I  fpeak  of  the  fecond, 

iSe  that  the  fecond,  with  yon  is  the  firft. 

4.  As  this  \z9i,  behold  iith.e.  fourth,  iat  with  you  the  third. 
A.  It  is  the  fevcnthtbut  the  third  of  the  fourteenth. 
aO    A  [c  c  2]  l\e... ii.it 


I 


zpo      4  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  JBions  mth/pirits,  6c  c. 


He.  .....  It  it  the  Cd//of  the  third. 

5.  7he  next in  EngUfli  is  I  have  fct 

Otherwife — —  O  thji. 

6.  'Jt^'e  f^xth  • —  The  mighty  founds . 

Otherwife'- — -  Saphah. 

7.  thefeventh The  fpirits  ' 

Gah. 

8.  The  eight — 7hf  Eaji 

ROa. 

lleni Look,that,  tb/itjiou  call  the  third. 

C.-]t  is  Raas. 

9.  The  next~—— The  midday  the  firji 

Bafemi  lo,  or  Bafemle. 

10.  *- ' ~"  ^  yvtzhtjf 

Micaoli. 


II.   "-- 


The  Thunders  of  judgenttHt  dHd  vratb 
Coraaxo. 


There  ctnicth  a  tph'-te  bright  C.'ond  about  bitH. 

12.  — ~~ — "-^ 2he  mighty  feat 

Sai 
OxCdial. 

E.  K.  Every  time  he  fpeaketh,  he  pulleth  fire  out  of  his  mbififi  /  and. 
cafteth  it  from  him. 

13.   .^ 0  you  •- 

Nonci.  'J  ^     ' 

14.  ■ " 0  you  fworis 

Napci. 

E.  K.    Now  a  white  Cloud  goeth  round. 

15. O  \0V  foKS 

No  Romi. 

i5.  .1^ ■  0  cho'itbfGovernour 

lis  Tabaam 

11 There  you  lac\,  the  third  vord  ?  ! 

A.   What  is  that  ? 

Of  the  firit  flamey  it  anf^eretb  to  L  al  purt.  ■Jji 

Tofihad  77or  the  expoftion  of  the  third  word. 

17.  Dye  of  the  ftcond  fiame. 

Jls  vivi  a  purt.  cX 

18.  —•       •  •  0  thou  third  fiame, 

lis  dial  part. 

19.  0  thou  mighty  light 

11  micalZoal  part. 

■^hus  you  have  not  lojiyyur  labour- 

E.  K.  Now  he  wrappeth  the  Cloud  that  was  under  him  about  his 
head. 

God  '.e  with  fou. 

E.  K.    Saw  him  go  upward.  . ,  ?* 

A.  Glory  be  to  God,  praife  and  honour  for.     ^nie». 


>>3  A 


M 


TburCday,y"lii  It,  i  Mereh.ra^.  fCracoviit.  'MTH 

Oratione  Dominica  finita,  &  breviter  ad  Ifejnefe  qnibufdam  diftis.  ^ 

E.  K.  The  Curtain  appeared  at  the  firft  looking.  ^Ik  V 

A.  Now  in  tiie  name  of  Jcms,as  concerning  thofe  30  Calls,  or  thirty  Call ,  we  await  "ydrtr 
information  of  Ilemefe. 

A.  Af- 


A  trueKe/ation  ofD\  Dee  his  JB'iQns  vitthfftritY,  v5cc.      "i bt 


A.  After  divers  parcels  of  our  Aftions  paft  with  Nilv'ize  being  rcad,which  were  very  well 
of  ns  liked,  at  length  Iletmfe^  appeared  :  and  aft^r  he  had  /hewed  himfelf  (  the  Curtain  being     llemife. 
opened  )  he  drew  the  Curtain  to  again.  ^  •'  > 

A.  I  then  faid  three  Prayers  out  of  the  Pfalm?,  &c. 

E.  K.  Now  he  ftandeth  as  Nalz>age  ufed   to  do,   upon  the  Globe 
with  the  rod  in  his  hand  :    And  Gahnelfitteth  by. 

A.  In  the  name  of  the  eternal  and  everlafting  God  fay  on. 

E.  K.    Now  the  Globe  tiirnethfwifrly,    and  he  polntetSHo   letters 
thus,  with  the  rod  which  Nalvage  was  wont  to  ufc. 

M  A  D  R  I  I  A  X  0  you  heavens  A.  I  think  this  word  wanteth       ^^("'^f'- 

^s  may  appear  by  Madrittx  ,  a- 
bout  44  words  from  the  end, 

D  S  P  R  A  F  which  dwell  Ds  frafr^: 

LIL  •     Itttbefirflair  Lil. 

Kit 
CHISMICAOLZ  are  mighty  Ch'ts  MkaoU. 

Gab.  ......  ^iove  »it,for  the  place  is  holy. 

L..  Hallowed  be  his  name,  that  fanftifieth  whatfoever  is  fan&fied. 

^^^SAANIR  in  the  parts  Saauir.  :    ^-  Ih, 

C  A  O  S  G  O  of  the  earth  Ca  osgt. 
OD 

F  I  S  I  S  and,  execute  Odfifis. 

BALZIZRAS  the  judgement  ^al  zi  zras. 

Ta 
I  AID  A  efthehigheji  la-ida. 

NONCA  to  you  Nonca. 

G  O  H  U  L  1  M  It  if  faid  Co  hk  Urn, 

E.  E.  There  came  a  black  cloud  in   the  air  about  the  Stone   as 
though  it  would  have  hindered  E.  K.  his  fight. 

Gabr. .....  It  hehoveth  us  to  do  that  we  do  even  vfith  frefent  contention  againil  the  wicked. 

Have  a  little  patience. 

-The  curtain  is  now  away  again,  and  they  appear  again. 

MiV^ia. 
M I C  M  A  'Behold  Mtcma.  afftr. 

_jiEs^|C.    Now  is  the  curtain  plucked  to  again,  and  they  covered. 


ADOIAN 

the  face 

A  do  i  an. 

MAD 

of  your  Gtd 

Mad. 

lA  OD 

Ihe  beginning 

I  i  od. 

BLIORB 

of  Comfort 

Bliirb, 

SABAOO  A  ONA 
t3Hl 

whtfe  eyes 
are 

Saba  0  0  it  ndi 
Kisf 

€hk. 

•^A  .A  LU CI F- 


O  or  A. 


I  ox_     <iJ'tr^e  %elatk'n  of  D^  Dee  his  JUions  nhhfpirits,  6c c. 


LU  C  I  F  T  I  A  S 

the  hrightuefe 

Jjt  cif  ti  as. 

PIRIP  SOL 

of  the  heavens^ 

Per  If  sol. 

aS 

which 

Vs. 

A  B  R  A  A  S  S  A 
NONCF 

provided 

you 

Alra'iffa, 

Konsf 

H.ncf. 

NE  TA  AI  B 

for  the  g  vtr»ment 

Ne  ti  a  ih. 

CAOSGI 

$ftbe  earth. 

Ca  0fgi. 

OD 

and 

Od. 

TILB 

her 

7ilh. 

i 

ADPHAHT 

tinfpea\ahle 

Adfhaht. 

t 

s 

He Read  it. 

A.   TheFnglifti. 
lie I 

'3 

DAMPLOZ 

variety. 

Dim  flest. 

TOOAT 
NONCF 

furnishing 

JOU 

1o  0  at. 
NoHsf 

Hon  cf. 

-■i 

GMIC  ALZOMA 

vith  a  fewer ymderftanding 

Gmi  cii Z6  ttta. 

LRASD 

to  difpofe 

Ltisd. 

TOFGLO . 

all  things 

Tifglo, 

■"• .  --; 

MARB 

according 

Marh. 

£  &.  It  follows  in  LihroCr*. ; 

►■• 

1 


HBRI 

.A  ]  !'"  ''< 


or  A 


I'ifi 


H* 


J  trueRelation  of  D^  Dee  his  Jtt'ms  wh [pints,  &:c,       ip7 


Ta]  Ki>tt.i  ■■  B-it  to  command  Kvigy  by  a  fnb]eaed  co»tmt,tdvent^  j^^  j  ^.^^  ^^^^  noK;nf,,;n  Emc& 
is  mt  vi['loy>iy  unleflc  it  come  iromthet.  BejpoU  Lord.,  Hm  hsri.n;;C.jn(iaerthe  eto.ehowto 
(hall  1  therefore   afcend  hitc  the  heavens   ?  'the  air  -will  not  carry     a»k  th  sdouSn  of  this  phnfc pro- 

m.  hut  refi'ieth  m  folly,  I  fall  down,  for  I  am  of  the  earth,  th.'re^     ''^"i^'J.  '"  ^^  '■  ^  ^"t  a'I'-  ^^ 

'     !,    .  Til  -      r    ^     ^1    ^\.     n.  /„-..,rft       thit  uniide"a  N  tnns  had  Kmzs 

fore,  0  thou  very  Lis,ht  and  true  i^omfort,   that  canft,  and  uuylt,     ^^^^■^^J^^^  ^^-^  ,i„,     j,,,^^. 

and  dott  conint and  the  heavens  ;   Behold  I  offer   thefe   Tables  unto     fore  there  might  be  fome  in  Enoch 

t/bffi  Command  them  as  ic  pleafeth  thee  :   and  Oyou  MinijL'rs,     histimf.  or  hctnophefiedof  them. 

and  true  liSl,hts  of  uuderjiandr.i^.  Governing  this  eartlily  frame, 

and  the  elements  wherein  we  live,  Ds  for  me  as  for  the  fervant  of  the  Lord  :    and  jtnio  whom  it 

hath  f leafed  the  Lord  totalk^  of  yon 

t,shold-,  Lord,  thouhaji  appointed  me  $0  times;   *  Thrice  50  times  w//  I  lift  my  hinds  unto  *  Ave, 
thee.      Be  it  unt  >  w'  as  't  f'l-.iCeth  th:e,  and  thv  holy  Mhtiiers.     I  require  nothin  j  biic  chee,  an  1  fhu  i .  to  fay, 
throiu;h  thee,  and  for  thy  honour  and  glory  :   But  I  htpe  I  jhall  be  fatisfied,  and  (hall  not  di  j,  thiiceiday. 
(As  thou  ha'ipromifed)K«t;/ tioK  gather  the  clouds  together,   and  judge  all  things  :  wkn 
in  a  moment  I  fhall  kg  changed  and  dwell  with  thee  for  ever. 

Thefe  words,  were  thrice  a  dayes  talk^betwixt  Enoch  an  I  God :  In  the  end  of  50  dayes,  there  rhrice  a  day. 
appeared  unto  him,  which  are  not  now  to  be  manifejied  nirfp^k/n  of :    he  enjoyed  the  fruit  of  Clod 
his  promife,  and  received  the  benefit  of  his  faith.     Here  may  the  wife  learn  wifdom  :  for  what  doth 
tnan  that  it  n-it  corruptible  ? 

\  fl  have  not  that  X  may  fay  any  more  unto  you  :  But  helievf  me,I  have  faid  great  things  unto  you :  If 
you  will  have  me  hereafter,  I  will  come. 

Conftder  well  my  words,  and  what  1  have  now  faid  unto  thee:  for  here  thou  mayji  learn 

vifdoM,  and  alfo  fee  what  thou  haft  to  do. 

A.  1  wi!l,if  itpleafe  you  read  over  fome  of  thefe  Invitations  which  I  have  made  and  writ- 
ten herein  this  Book. 

Ave io''  may  not  ufethat  word  Obedientes. 

.    A.    You  fpake  of  a  firft  word  tocall,  and  of  a  fecond  tvi  coirdrain. 

Ave. It  fignifieth,  it  iirgeth  them  more  in  God.     I  have  faid. 

A.  Note,  what  is  meant  by  the  name  of  God  that  was  faid  to  conftrain,  being  the  fecond  vvh«ij  meant 
names  of  two  before  given.  by  the  phrafe 

£.  K.  He  is  gone,  and  all  covered  with  the  Curtain.  ftraUiTinre- 

A.  All  honour,  pralfe,  and  glory,  all    thanks  and  power,     is  due  to  our  God  and  King,  ^^^ggi^'  ^°° 

So  be  it.     AmeH. 


Monday,  Juliiy  p.  Mane  bora  y.  three  quarters,    f  Cracovir. 
Orationibus  quibufdam  finitis  ad  Deum  8c  deindcad  Gabrie'em  Sc  Nalvage,  Zee. 

E.  K.  As  foon  as  he  looked,  he  found  the  Stone  covered  with  the 
white  Curtain. 

A.  A  paufe  of  a  ^  of  an  hour  :  In  which  fpace  I  ufed  fundry  ejaculations  to  God,  and  his 
good  Angels. 

A.  This  day  was  appointed,  we  attend  therefore  your  inftruftions.  At  length  they  ap- 
peared not,  but  ufed  a  voice. 

A->oice.  .^hii  day,  but  the  Sun  decliningthe  fourth  hour- 

tt..  Your  meaning  is,  that  at  after  noon,  at  4  of  the  clock. 

The  voiie. As  thou  haji  written ^- 

A.  The  will  of  the  Higheit  be  done.         Amen. 


Monday,  A  Meridie,  hora  4. 
A.  As  E.K.  was  faying  to  me,  that  he  thought  that  the  Angels  might  tell  the  certain  day 
liandtimesof  things  to  come,  and  that  Angels  could  now  fall  no  more,  d^r.     Offuch  things 
|>  touching  Angels ;  fuddenly  a  voice  was  heard,  as  followeth. 
*  ■  Ajroicd Herein  will  I  talk^with you,  my  brethren. 

E.  K.  Gabriel  onely  appeareth  :    neither  Nal'vage  nor  the  Table 
appearech.        He  fitteth  in  a  Chair,  and  with  his  fiery  Dart. 

Gabr. .;....  7heProphets  infpired  with  the  Holy  Ghofi,were  affuredoftbe  coming  of  their  Meffiits, 
ef  their  Chriji:   But  what  day,  or  in  what  year  was  not  of  mans  under jianding.     Chriit  kimfelf 
opened  unto  hit  J)tfcipUs  bis  death  ,  and  the  manner  thereof  ;  but  the  day  and  hour  he  never  dif- 

[cc]  eltfed. 


I I  —  _  ■  ^ 

15/8       A  true  Relation  0/  D^  Dee  hts  Mions  mthfpirits,  &c. 

De  fecundo  aJ.  c/cfed.  So  I/lifWife  the  ScrifUires  ffeni^  f  the  coming  of  Chrift,  but  the  day  and  hour  ,  tht  Son  of 
ventu  cbrijli.  wan  kjioweth  not.  But  hecavfc  in  time  to  icvte  ,  and  for  this  ur;ion  ,  (the  vitjfage  of  the  higkeji) 
AHd  affuredyard  infallible  'Door ine^Qntrefped  that  God  appointed  ytt  no  certain  time')  is  neref- 
fary.  For^  for  this  caufe  you  waver  »n  brethren:  and  may  lofe  the  benefit  of  God  his  favour,  and 
mercies.  0  weaklings  examine  the  frophets,  look^  into  the  doing  of  the  Apojiles  .  There  alwayes 
V(Ht  a  fromife  iefore  the  end  :  But  the  end  WM  the  benefit  and  fruit  of  the  fromife.  Some  aU 
leadge  Paul,  ^ome  Peter,  fowe  Daniel  :  But  m  this  cafe  (hall you  alleadge  the  fayings  of  God,/"y&j- 
ken  in  the  fpirit  of  truth  by  me  ^ahriel,  the  fervant  of  the  higheji.  God^for  three  canfes  hi- 
deth  the  ehd,  and  the  very  time  of  his  heavenly  purpofes.  As  after  a  little  filence  you  Jhall  jhert- 

ly  hear. 

E.  K.  A  cloud  covereth  him.  • 

E.  K.   Now  he  appeareth  again. 

Gab. .....  Firii,  Lj  reafcn  of  his  own  intxplirahle  Eft  &  non  eft  efTe,  which  u  without  the  circum- 
ference yjirength,  capable  vertjie,  and  power  of  man,  dii  intelleciuainy,  whereby  be  appeareth  to  be 
verily  one  God,  and  incom-rehenfble. 

Secondly,  i'ccaufe  Lucifer  w/r/)(!»Af  yea  {iycrs,(d.in?ned  juily)  fhuuld  never  talh  of  hit  light, 
nor  onderlhind  hif  feeret  -judgements  :  whi  h  he  Vould,  and  might  d»,  if  they  were  delivered  to  mans 
imagination,  and  d/fconrfe  :  Becaufett  is  withm  the  circumference  and  compajfe  of  hit  Creation. 
Conf  ler  of  thefe  two. 

E- K.  Now  he  is  covered  in  a  white  Cloud  again. 

^  A,   The  firft  reafon,  or  caife  we  do  not  fufficiently  underftand,  or  conceive. 

Deufet  eff-,'^2n&.[iDcus.  - 

JSlon  ei  tjje,  I  uipiis  Deus. 

For,  In  the  judgement  day,  G  d  in  his  fon,  Chriii,jhanfkut  up  his  perpetual  and  everlaliing  Jm 

fiice,  wrath,  and  anger,  >  nh  Hell  and  damnation.        Leavng  them,  and  forfakjng  them,  and  im 

no  cafe  to  be  called  their  G  d.        Fratres  \_>i'~\  non   habebunt  Dcum.         But  they  fiiall  be  without 

a  guide,  and  without  a  Centre.       Hcruy  jou  may  underjiand  ,  EfTe  &  non  eft  efle.         To  the 

pirp4^. 

Thirdly,  that  man  firmly  perfwaded  of  things  fpokjn  of  hy  Ged  above  hif  capacity  to  come ,  att4 
unknown,  might  worthi'y  in  the  jirength  of  faith,  and  thrmigh  the  effea  of  hit  premifes  merit  his  fa- 
vour in  Chriji,  and  receive  eternal  falvation,ju}iIy  before  God  and  bis  A»gels.  Thefe  are  the  three 
caifes, 

A.  Thi?  laft  caufe,  if  it  would  pleafe  you  to  make  more  plain,  it  ftiould  greatly  cnfcrm  us 
and  confirm  us. 

......  Thcfe  are  the  three  onely  caufes,  that  the  ends  of  God  his  determinations  are  feeret. 

1.  In  the  fir  IT,  that  God  vi/ght  appear  omnipotent. 

2.  In  the  fecondyfeaicd  up  in  bimfelj  from  the  knowledge  of  fuch  «  have  rebelled  t«  their  de* 
firudion, 

3.  In  the  third,  that  man  vtight  jririly  be  made  Worthy  of  the  places  prepared  for  him. 
Wedntfdiy           ^^.Uzge  it  called  away .  .end  cannot  be  in  jidion  wiihyeu  till  Wedne(dzy,        Then  fhall  you 
following.        have  the  Calls  thatyoi;  look  for.     And  fo  enter  into  the  knowledge  and  pcrfeft  i:nderf 

ftaiiding  of  the  ^^  Gates  and  Tables  if  youwill. 

k.   O  Lord,  thy  will  and  mercy  be  (hewed  upon  us. 

Gab. But  vudeijiand  that  it  it  a  labour,  the  hardell  and  the  lafi,  • 

A.   Violenti  nihil  difficile  :  God  ftrengthen  our  will  and  faiih. 

Gab.. ...  /  hdve  utthing  e.fe  to  fay  unto  you.        But  God  be  merciful!  untt  you  j  and  forgive  jow 
your  fins. 
A.  Amen. 

Gab And  that  you  go  hence,  mak/  hajte. 

A. 

E.   K.   He  is  gone.  ; , 

A.  Gloria  Patri,  &  hlio,&  fpiritui  Sanfto  (icut  erat  in  principio,  8c  nunc  &  fcmpcr  ,  &  in 
fecula  feciiloruni.     Amen. 


At  four  o(  the 
Clock  after 
nooD, 


Craccvi£. 


The  Curtain  appeared 
jhaight  way. 


Wednefday,  JuUi  11.     Mane  hora,  6  f. 
Oratione  dominica  finita,  &c. 
A.    We  await  the  promife,  which  you  made  us  ,  O  Gabriel. 
A  voyce.   Not  ntw,  tut  at  the  fourth  htur^  declining  as  before, 

E.  K.  And  why  not  now  as  well.> 

A  voyce.  He  that  laLeureth  tn  hit  own  barveji  laboureth  when  he  lifi  :  but  he  that  fijheth  oh  the 
Se^'^muii  be  ruled  by  her  *urfe, 
A^i^Fiat  voluntas  Dei. 

Wedncf- 


•f\     ,  '   " '        ""'  ■  ■  II  I  ^ I ^ 

I         4 trueRelation  o/D^ Dee  ^/j  jaions  mthfpirits,  dec.       205: 


OD 

and- 

Od. 

Longjorjhort. 

CHRISTEOS 

Let  there  le 

Chris  te  os. 

AGLTOLjTORN 

m  one  Creature 

Ag  1  ter  torn 

PARACH 

equal 

Ah. 
Ach. 

A  S  Y  M  P 
CORDZIZ 

D  O  D  P  A  L 
OD 

FIFALZ- 

LSM  N AD 


the  wielded  fiakfbehmdeE.  K. 

yith  anether. 

The  reafcjiable 
Creatures  of  the  earthy 
or  Man. 

Let  thetftvf^^ 
and 

"iPeed  out 
one  another. 


Pa  rach. 

A  fjmp. 
Cord  ziz. 

TQod  pal. 
Od. 

Fi  falz. 
Ls  nonad. 


E.  K.  Now  the  Curtain  is  drawn. 

A  voycc Kead. 

A.   I  read  it ....  terfrom  the  beginning  hitherto, 
lie. IVhereat  doiAt  you. 

'^by  turned  God  Adam  out  into  the  earth  ^      '  ^      ^'  ''''''  '^'  '''^'       ^'^''''  ^'^ 

^.  Becaiife  he  had  tranfgrefTed  the  Lav^s  to  be  kept  in  Paradife. 

u'mZo%  earJt"  ^ff7  f7f"'^'  '''T'^  ^"''"'"'''  f"'  ^^  cfence^in'm  he  >;«  t.rn- 
L  tL7do'n  i-rt\ha^  /f'  ''"i  ^T  ''''T^  7.\  ''  '^  ^^'^^^  f^'^'^^  ^ben  can  you  not  aptly  fay  he 
<^fa%r.c^x\tJ\n    0  IrlZ         F''i  ''/'J^'^'''' •■  ^-'^/^  Adam,  fro;,  ntnocency  through 

'  r4^J/'^ChriHrought  allblejfedneffe^a^^  T    ^T" ' 


Note. 


If. 


f^ftJO"  ^^y  mderjiand  my  rule.'] 

\    Note,  All  this  was  anfweredbv  a  vovce  a=;.coiirrrtim,T  ,i„>        a- 
ore  exprcfFed.  /"  ^0706,35. conceining  niy  queflion. 


caith. 
or  doubt  hereto- 

tinif,.  ^;„..v  ,.«....  L..L .  ^    ,       ,        coarge  with  their  Creation,  but  afterward  in d  , 


times,  d'vers  offices.bith  toward  God  and  7nan. 

^  ''''^''' ^'  '''"'"''^  '''^rmng  I  will  meet  you  here  the  third  B 

[dd] 


'jur, 


A.    The 


20 6       A  true^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBtons  mthjf^irtts,&.c. 


^.  The  third  hoir  after  the  Sun  riling  mean  you  > 

Avoycc I- 

A.  Let  \  s  hartily  than 
vpon  ns,  now  and  ever.    Amen 


A    Let'i  s  hartily  thank  the  Lord  and  praife  him  alw ayes :  His  Mercy  and  Grace  be 


TTyA^y^Ji'tii  13,  Manehoraj.  +  Cracovidt. 

A.  Orati  ne  Diwimca  finitdy  8cc. 

^.    At  the  firft  looking  ,  E.  K.  faw  the  Curtain  ufual  to  appear  ,  and  fomewhat  plighted, 
and  fhordy. 

^  voyce f^ead  that  you  have  done. 

A.  I  read  hitherto  that  was  written. 

E.  K.  Now  they  appear,  the  Curtain  being  drawn  away  :  But  the 
round  Table,  or  Globe  appeared  not. 
£.  K.  Now  they  have  drawn  the  Curtain  over  them  again* 

A.   BlefTed  be  they  that  are  come  in  the  name  of  our  God,  and  for  his  fcrvicc. 

E.  K,  Now  they  appear,  and  the  Table,  or  Globe  with  them. 

]lc Ihereji. 

A.   In  the  name  of  Jefus,  and  for  his  honour. 

OD 

FARGT 

BAMS 

OMAO A  S 

CONISBRA 

OD 

AUAVOX 

TO  NUG 
ORSCATBL 
NOASMI 
TAEGES 
LEVITHMONG 


UNCHI 

OMPTILB 

ORS 
B  AGLE 

MOOOAH 


OLCORDZ{lZ 


And 

Od. 

the  dweUing  places^ 

Gad. 

Farg  t. 

Let  them  forget 

Bams 

their  nameSf 

Omaoas. 

the  ffgrk.of  man 

Co  nis  bra. 

and 

Od. 

bk  pmp : 

A  ua  vox. 

Let  them  he  defaced 

To  nug. 

hit  huildjngs^ 

Ors  cat  bl. 

let  them  become 

No  af  mi. 

Caves 

Tabges. 

f$r  the  heajis  of  the  field 

Levith  raong; 

ctnfound 

Ki. 
Un  chi. 

her  mdtrflanding 

Omp  tilb.               ; 

With  darkjiejfe^ 

.  Ors. 

for  vhy  ? 

Bagle. 

it  refenteth  me 

Mo  0  Oah. 

I  made  man 

01  cord  ziz.    ' 

LCA" 

^^tme  "Relation  ofD',  Dee  his  J&ions  mth  fpirits,  ^c.       207 


LCAPIMAO 

IXOMA  XIP 
ODCACOCA  S  B 


CMC  while 

let  her  he  kfUWH, 

and  /ntttber  while 


Gab '..  Move  ftot,  for  the  place  is-holj. 

E.  K.  All  is  covered. 
E.  it.  Now  it  is  open. 


GOSAA 

a  firafigety 

BAGLEN 

becaufe 

PII 

TIANTA 

Jhek 
thehei 

ABAB ALOND 

of  an  har!o% 

ODFAORGT 

and  the  dwelling  place 

TELOGVOVI M 

of  him  tbas  is  fallen. 

MADPlIIAX 

Oyou  heavens 

T  0  R  Z  II 

arife. 

OADRI  AX 

The  lower  heavens 

orocha 

Underneath  j/ou 

ABOAPRl''^ 

let  them  ferve  j/etif 

TABAORI 

Gtvern 

PRIAZ 

thtfe 

ARTABAS 

that  goverfi^ 

ADRPAN 

Caji  dswtt^ 

CORSTA 

fiich  as 

DOBIX 

fall. 

Y  0  L  C  A  M 

hring  forth 

E.  K.  Now  the  Curtain  is  drawn. 


PRI  AZI 
ARCOAZIOBl 
O  D  QJX  A  S  B 


with  thofe 

that  encreafej 

and  dejhroj 
[dd  2] 


L  ca  pi  ma  o, 
Ix  o  mf.x  ip. 
Od  ca  CO  casb. 


Go  fa  a. 

Baglen. 

Pii. 

M  / 
Ti  anta. 

i    ..  ; 
A  ba  ba  lond. 

gtjordgr. 
Od  fa  orgc. 

lotch,  ot  loch. 

Te  16c  vo  V  im, 

yax 
Madri  iax. 

Tor  zu. 

O  adriair, 

ka. 
Orocha. 

A  bo  a  pri, 

Taba  o  ri. 

Priaz. 

Ar  ta  bas, 

dirJ-J  AT 
A  dr  pan. 

Cor  fla. 
Dobiz. 

YoJ  earn.  X 


fuitu 
Ar  CO  a  zior; 


Od  quasb. 


QjriNd 


2,  o  8       ^A  true  %elation  of 

D^ 

,  Dee  his  ABions 

whfpirits,  6c  c. 

CLTING 

the  rotten 

dg 
Qjing. 

RIPIR 

No  place. 

Ripfr. 

PA  AOXT 

let  it  remain 

Pa  a  oxt, 

Kor 

S AG ACOR 

in  one  number. 

Sa  ga  cor. 

V  ML 

Adde 

Vml. 

OD* 

and. 

Pur 

PRDZAR 

• 

Diminijh 

Prd  lar. 

C  A  CR© 

until 

ciirg 
Cacrg- 

AOIVEAE 

the  Stars 

Aoiveae. 

CORMPT 

he  numbred ; 

Comipc 

T»ORZU 

drifei 

Term. 

ZACAR 

Move 

Zacar. 

ODZAMRAN 

and  appear 

Od  zamian.' 

ASPT 

before 

Afpt. 

SIBSI 

the  Covendfti 

Sibfi. 

E.  K.  Now  he  hath  drawn  the  curtain  again. 

BUTMONA 
DS 

SURZAS 
TIA 

BALTAN 


ODO 

CICLE 

QA  A 

OD 

OZAZMA 

PLAPLI 

lADNAMAD 

ofhitmouthi 

But  mo  na. 

which 

Ds, 

be  hath  [worn 

Surzas. 

unto  m 

Tia. 

in  hi*  Juji'tce. 

Balcan. 

m 

Open 

Odo. 

the  myfieries 

Cicle. 

of  pur  Creation^ 

QJa. 

and 

Od. 

maks  ut 

Ozazma. 

partakfrs 

Plapli. 

0fundefiled  knowledge. 

lad  na  mad 

3ik 


A  true  'Relation  of  jy.  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  fpirits,  (3cg,      2  op 


The  fir\i  A'lre^  is  called ■ ■ -» Li!. 

Thefecond • • Am. 

The  third  • '     '  ■ — ■ Zom. 

4  • —-■ • Paz. 

5 — '—' 1 Maz. 

— . — ^  Deo. 


7 

8 — Zid. 

Zip. 


9 

10 

II 

12 


I 


? 


—  Zax. 

-Ich     ik. 

—  Loe. 

—  Zini. 

—  Ura. 

—  Oxo. 


H ■ 

15 

\6 ■ "  Lea. 

17 ■ Tan. 

18 Zen. 


Pop. 


19 

20  '■ -' — -" -" Chr       karinpalato 

21 ■ • • — Afp.         very  miich. 


■-  Lin. 
Tor. 

Nia. 
Uti, 


22 

23 

24 

^> 

26 ■ ■ • Des. 

27 — • ■-  Zia. 

28 ■ : ■: Bag. 

jp .■ . — -— Rii. 

50  . • — '— — •• —  Tes, 


^here  it  all' 


tioff  change  the  name,  attd  the  Call  it  all  me.  Note. 

A.  Blefled  be  he  who  onely  is  alwayes  one.  ^"1*  ^'''»  One 

A.   I  take  thefe  names  tobe  aj;)rjwK^,/>aW;«-,  ffrr/ar,  and  to  30.  th-?"*^  ^'^* 

A  voice ATor/a,  tifj  if  t/jefubftantial  namesof  the  Aires. 

A.  It  was  faid  they  had  no  proper  names  ;  but  were  to  be  ca'led,  O  thou  of  the  firft  Aire, 
O  thou  ofthe  fecondjdfc.  I  pray  you  reconcile  the  repugnancy  of  thsfe  two  places,  as 
they  (hould  feem. 

£.  K.  The  Curtain  is  opened. 
£.  £.  Now  Gabriel  ftandeth  up. 

Gabr Thiuhath  Gad  k^eptproinife  ivithyou^  and  hath  delivered yo74  the  keyes  of  his  ftdre- 

houfes  :  wherein  you  Jhall  find,  (if  jou  enter  wifely,  humbly,   and  ^Titiently  ^  Jreafures   mare 
vnrth  than  the  frames  of  the  heavens. 

But  yet  it  not  Auguft  csme  :  Notvpithftanding  the  Lord  hath  kf^t  his  fromrfe  with  you  before  „   ,  ^.-     ^^^ 
the  time.     Therefore,  Njro  examine  your  Bookj,  Confer  one  place  with  anocher,  and  learn  10  bt  mlf^cfuifine) 
ferfedfor  the  prahice  and  entrance,  before  A.  gi.-li. 

See  that  your  garments  be  clean.        Herein  be  not  ralh  :    Nor  over  hafiy ;     Frthofe  that  are  Cnuvfc]    for 
hafy  and  rajh,  and  are  lothfomely  apparelled,  may  knock  long  before  they  enter.  p^epiration. 

There  is  n»  other  readingofthe  Book^,but  the  appearing  of  the  Minijiers  and  Creatures  of  God  .-The  reaciing 
vhichjhewing  what  they  are  themfelves,Jhew  how  they  are  conjoyned  in  prpfer,  and  reprefented  "^  i'''''''^''''- 
formally  by  thofe  letters.  '^^^  letceis; 

E.  K.  Now  he  taketh  the  Table,  and  feemeth  to  wrap  it  up  to- 
gether. 

A.    Seeing  I  have  moved  the  doubt  oi their  names  I  pray  you  to  diflblve  it. 

Gab Jou  play  with  me  childijhly. 

'  A.  I  have  done. 

Gab Thinkj-fl  thou  thatwe  fpeak^  any  thing  that  it  n-.t  true  ? 

Thou /halt  never  kjiow  the  mylhries  of  all  things  that  have  been  fpoken.  The  rayfterfcs 

_  If  jo«  love  togct^fr,  and  dwell  together,  and  in  one  God  ;  Thenthefelf-fime  Godwillhemer-^l^^^  ^'^'■'^ 
cifulnntoyou:   JVhichbleffe  jov,  comfort  yu,  and  firengthen  you  u»to  the  end.       More  I  would^^H      ^^^^' 
ifaj,  hut  words  profit  not.     God  be  amongfi  you. 

E.  K.  Now  they  both  be  gone  in  a  great  flame  of  fire  upward'?. 

A.  Laudibu^ 


2  lo      A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions  mthfpirits,  <3cc. 


A.  LaudibiistecelebraboDomine  Deusquoniam  non  prxvaluGrrnt  luimici  mei  fuper  me. 
Domine  exercitiuim  clamavi  ad  te,Sc  tu  falvaftinie.  ConverciUi  dolorem  in  gaudium  mihij 
diflblvif^i  luftimi mcum  8c  circumdtdifti  nic  Ixtitia.  Mifericcidias  tras in  ytenuim  caiitabo. 
Notam  faciam  vaiiactmtiiani  in  vicamea.  Os  meum  narrabit  Jufticiani  tiianiomni  tem- 
pore beneficia  tua :  certc  non  noyi  numerum.  Sed  Gratias  agam  donee  mors  ia^>iar  ,  tibi 
pfa'ilam  quamdiu  fueio.  Laiidem  tui  loquetur  qs  raeiim  :  &:  omnv;  vivens  celebiT  nomen 
tuum  SanftiMi,  in  pei  petunm  &  femper.  Laiidatc  Domimim,  O  vos  Angeli  ejus,  potentes  vir- 
tute  facientes  juiriis  tjvsj  obedientes  voci  verbi  illius.  Collaudace  Dcuni  Umverli  exerci- 
tus  ejus ,  Miiiiftri  ejus  qui  facitis  voluncatem  ejus.       Omne  quod  vivk  la.det  te  Oomine, 

1584.     Ptemeniber'that  on  Saturdityi  the  fourteenth  day  oijuly ,  by  the  Gregorian  Caleh- 

Hi!andu;fene    der,  and  the  fourth  day  oi  Jvhy  by  the  old  Calender  ,  Rowland  my  Childe  (who  was  born 

»;;,  tHHs,  /inuo  i^iSj.  JnjUary  2%.  by  the  old  Calender^  was  excreamly  iick  about  nooH  ,  or  midday, 

and  by  one  of  the  Clock  ready  to  givu  up  the  Glioft,  or  rachcr  lay  for  dead,  ajid  his  eyes   let 

and  funck  mco  his  head,  &r., 

I  made  a  vow,  if  the  Lord  did  forefec  him  to  be  his  true  fervant  ,  and  fo  would  grant  him 
life,  and  confirm  him  his  health  at  this  danger,  and  from  this  danger  I  would  Cduriug  my 
life)  on  Sacurdayes  eat  but  one  meal,  8iC. 

Remember  on  ?/^4'.;/«f/'i<z7  night  the  eighteenth  of  J?^/>',  as  I  walkedalone  about  nine  of  the 
Clock  in  the  evening,  in  the  Chamber  before  my  btudy,  fabove)  indivers  places  of  that 
Chamber  appeared  flaihesof  fire,  and  did  not  li_,hten  abroad. 

Mi-.nday,  jK/zi  23.   MjneCirciter  S.  f  Cracoviz. 

"  Orritione  Dominica  finita, 

A.  I  read  hUpfama.  his  firft  words  of  the  book  to  be  prepared  of  48  leaves  to  be  filvcred, 
and  would  gladly  know  what  I  was  now  to  do.  By  and  by  at  the  firft  looking  into  the 
flone. 

£.  K.  There  appeared  ten  Pikes,  all  black  on  the  ground  in  a  Cir- 
cle as  it  were,  and  i  in  the  iniddle,a  great  Pike,  franding  up.  And 
Vera,fa!fis,  falfa^  fecmed  to  be  written  in  the  middle  of  that^  Circle, 
fomewhat  blacker  then  all  the  reft ,  which  feemed  to  be  as  new  molten 
Pitch. 

A  voyce ^i  non  in  7.    rivant  m  j'ndecimo. 

b..  I  made  a  fhort  difcourfe  to  God  of  my  fincere,  and  juft  dealing,hitherto  of  the  book  of 
Enoch,  written,of  the  book  to  be  filvered,  how  hardly  I  can  get  it  peiformed  to  my  content- 
ment:  (the  books  being  laid  on  the  Table,  that  of  £«of/E?,  and  that  as  it  were  filvered)  ^c,  I 
craved  therefore  the  expofition  of  this  dark  /hew  ,  and  as  yet  nothing  plcafant,  or  plain:  Mjr 
confcience  is  clear,  and  1  truftin  the  Lord  his  mercies. 

E.  K.  After  this  appeared  a  man  all  black,  naked  all  over. 

0  thou  that  art  juji,  and  haji  a.  clear  conscience,  answer  me. 

A.  Inthenamc  of  Jefus. 
g.     „g  fFho'commandedtheetohe  gtnet 

I  take  the  Commandment  to  have  been  from  God. 

Thou  haji  brohjn  the  Commandment  of  God, 

A.    J  can  in  no  cafe  yield  thereunto. 

I0U  have  dijhonoured  the  Lord  :  which  if  juji  in  the  bottom  of  his  ovn  Ireafi,  *nd  gave  yoU 

warning,  and  commanded  you  to  go :  rehich  is  the  Lord  of  Heaven  and  Earth. 
May  IT.  MMt.      ^'    O  Lord,  my  firft  charge  was  in  thefe  words :   Thou  ftalt  go  from  hence  -^ith  him  te  the 
EtiMeridie     Emferour  :  It  was  alfo  faid  that  he  fhould  make  proviiion  for  this  one  voyage  ,  and  for  the 
ter  Maplama.   reft  God  had  provided.  So  that  feeing  I  was  to  go  wicli  him,  and  he  hath  not  yet  provided 

'avI.         ^" (''*°'"§  ^'^^"^  ^^  '^''"^  "'''"^  ^^"  ^  %5  or  do  ? 

......  True  it  it,  thou  haji  had  theviciory,  and  thou,  and  thy  Children  have  tdfled  mercy.    Thou  art 

one  of  thofe,  that  when  I  command  thee  to  leave  nothing  with  life,  yet  tboufaveji  the  fat  lings  to  of- 
fer before hiw  that  abhorreth  fuch facrifice. 

A.  Lord,  I  know  no  fuch  aft  of  mine  :  The  Lord  be  mercifuU  tome.  For  when  it  fliould 
come  to  fuch  a  cafe,  God  knoweth,  1  would  fpare  none. 

0  than  juji  man  \_Uiaking  bis  head'}  thou  art  become  a  Saul. 

.......  Wherefore  did  God  (anfwer  me)  tal{e  the  Kingdom  out  of  Saul  hit  hands  ? 

A.  It  appeareth  in  the  Bible,  becaufe  obedience  was  better  then  facrifice. 
Keg.i.caf.is.       ......  Eie;t  f».^  if  thou  badi  been  obedient  ,  thy  obedience  had  been  regarded.         But   I  fay  unto 

thee  3  the  Lord  oweth  thee  nothing  for  thy  labour  :  he  hath  fayed  thee  to  the  uttermsji. 

At 


<$j{  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  J&ions  mth  fpirits^dcc  211 

Js  for  Lasky,  J  wi//  give  him  over  Xo  the  fphk  of  errour :  and  he  Jhall  become  more  poor  ,  fo       '^■'^■ 
that  his  cfCH  Children  jhall  defpife  hint.  H'.s  phgue 

But  itfljall  not  come  to  pajjl  in  thefe  d.jyes :  For  I  will  keep  my  promife  with  you.        Tou  do       \^Omait 
the  Commandment  of  Princes^  and  Lords,  and  Mitjiers :  Eat  wh  n  the  God  of  Juliice  (without  your  merci'f  U     n  I 
defert)  entertainerh you,  and placeth yoriy  and  dffelletb  amongi you,  (which  if  able  to  give  you    all pUCod. 
things^  commandfth  you  to  go,  and  that  for  your  own  profit, you  thinks  it  nothing  to  offend  him. 

Bat  true  it  ii,.7hat,  Ohed/ence  p.'eafeth  the  Lord  for  thererin,his  Creatures  glortfie  him  moll.    Obedience. 
All  IForJhip,  a II  Honour,  all  Love,  all  Faith,  all  Hope,  all  Charity  ,  all  the  knitting  together  of  the 
Heavens  confijieth  in  Obedience.   For  if  you  had  beeWohedient,the  very  jhnts  of  the  earth  [hould 
have  feived  your  iiecelTity.        For  the  Lord  will  not  be  found  a  lyar. 

A.  O  Lord,  be  mercifuU  to  me:  1  could  not  do  thy  Commandment  in  going  without 
A.  L^iskje,  and  him  1  was  not  able  to  caufe  to  goe  without  provision  :  And  to  our  judgement 
he  feemeth  marvelloufly  tobe  careful!  to  make  provifion  :  but  ftill  he  hath  liindfrance. 

Jhou  (heareji  thou/ J  the  Lord  forgiveth  thee  :  but  frnnhencef.rth, 

he  commandeth  thee  that  thou  open  ntt  the  fecrets   and   the  judgements,     No'^morc^fcc  "rof  G  d 
which    the    Lord  jhall  open   unto    thee  of    the    times    to    come,   unto     to  be  opened  to /l.L. 
La'^ktc, 

A.  I  pray  you  tofay  fomcwhat  unto  us,  as  concerning  this  book  to  be  filvered  :  Elfe  what 
fhall  I  do,  if  1  have  not  direftion  herein,  the  cafe  being  fo  hard. 

. .....  As  concerning  the  book^,  when  thou  art  at  the  end  of  thy  journey  it  Jfjall  he  told, 

A.  Mifericordias  Domini  in  ieternura  Qantabo,  ^Wf«.    Hallelujah.    Amen. 


Tuefday,  Julii  ^i.  Mane  hora  y.  f  Cracoviae. 

OrationeVomiuica  finita,&  variis  ejaculationibus  faUii  tarn  ad  Gabrielem  ,  quam  Nalvage, 
Ave,  Mapfama,  &  llemer,  quam  maximc  ad  Deum  ipfum  pro  fuo  lumine,  diuxilio  &  froteClione  : 
tatu  in  iff  a  aOionequam  itinere  pr^fenti,  futuro,verfus  aulavi  Csfaris, 

After  a  great  hour  attendance.  At  length  appeared  one  all  naked,  black,  and  about  the 
ftone  a  Circle  of  black . 

He  faid Were  you  not  commanded  to  go  after  ten  dayes  ? 

A.  It  is  true. 

......  And  what  followeth? 

A.  I  appeal  unto  the  mercy  of  the  higheft,  for  that  I  have  not  offended  upon  wilfulneffe. 

Say  what  foUoweth. 

A.  It  followeth  that  we  may  drink  of  a  Cup,  which  we  would  not,  &c.  And  alfo  we  were 
willed  to  provide  for  this  journey,  which  provifion  onely  now  is  made  for  us  two  ,  and  not  yet 
for  A.  L-  himfelf. 

« Ihm  fayeth  the  Lord,  I  have  flretched  out  my  band  ,  and  you  have  kindred  me. 

I  have  brought  things  unto  their  courfe,  but  you  have  thruji  your  felves  between. 

Whin  1  appointed  yott  lO  dayes,  did  I  not  alfo  tell  you  that  the  earth  was  mine.  lo  Dayes. 

Am  not  I  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  by  whomyM  breath.  Jke  fame  which  alfo  forfai^eth  not 
wy  people  tn  the  time  of  need. 

I  have  opened  my  wings,  but  you  have  refufed  my  cover. 

I  have  brought  in  raadnefle  into  the  houfe  of  the  unjvji,  but  you  have  pre-  A-  Forti.  MadmlTe 
vented  my  judgement.  procured    in  the  K. 

Andbecaufeyouhavedonefo,andhavetrjifled  more  inthe  malUces  of  the  y"rd''*^  "  ""*'  '^"°' 
'  Vorld  then  in  my  power . 

[p.  Lord  we  have  not  done  fo ;  to  our  knowledges.]  A. A  fcourge  to  fol- 

therefore  jli  all  you  drink^  of  a  Cup  that  you  would  not  :  but  it  jhall  not  1°'*  ^into  u$ :  Lord  be 

fall  in  thefe  dayes,  but  in  the  dayes  to  come.  merciful'. 

[E.  K.  The  fire  Cometh  out  of  his  mouth  as  he 
'^'""''''  fpeaketh.] 

If  you  go,  it  is :  if  you  go  ntt,  it  alfo  jhall  be. 

.    [^A.   Make  that  dark  fpeech  plain,  for  I  need  you  not.] 

A.    We  were  willed  to  go,  but  with  this  condition,  that  Ljskje  fhould  make  provifion. 

-  Ihavenot  fealedthii  fn  unto  the(\js..'y  ut yet  Ihave  meafpred  out  a  plague,  and  it  fhall  light        ^' ^ 

Upon  you  all.  But  unto  L?isky  I  have  fe  ale  d  it,  and  it  Jhall  be  heavy. 

E.  K.  Doth  not  A.L.  ufe  all  the  means  he  can   for  provifion  ma- 
king. 

Ihe  time  Jhall  come  when  lam,  and  will  appear  unto  thee  in  aVifion,  andof  feven  Rtdsthou 

'  j^alt  cbufeone,  unto  you  both  Ifpeak^:  For  I  will  not  let  paffe  my  diponour  mtpunijhed,neither  will  I 
fell  my  name  li\e  an  hireling. 

Notwithjiandiiig,  in  the  midf  of  my  fury  I  will  be  merciful!  unto  you,  when  you  think,  I  have  for" 
faksnyoui  then  jhall  the  Rod  break,  in  pieces. 

A,  Lord 


1 12-       A  trvie  Relation  vfD\  Dee  his  jUions  mih  /pints,  d^ c. 

h.  Lord  deal  with  us,  as  we  have  juft  caufc  to  pnt  ojy  truft  in  thee ,  not  onely  in  the  prini 
cipal  rtate  of  orr  falvatioii,  but  alto  in  this  Aftioii. 

You  £;o  :  I  will  not  forrake  you.     A'td  what  I  have  [aid,  that  I  have  [aid.        And  it  is  a 

living  fpirity  andjkallbearwitnejfeof  itfdf.        For,  great  is  the  God  of  HoUs  in  power, and  in  all 
his  Tvorkj,  and  words  molt  jwi. 

a.   Lord,  is  it  thy  will  that  we  fhal!  po  before  this  A.  L.  toward  Prage  ? 

......  If  ymi  tarry  it  \'i^  and  if  yon  gfl,  it  fliall  be. 

A.  Lord  make  that  plain  vnto  us? 

7kus  fayeth  the  Lord,  if  you  tarry, \t  h  tecanfe  I  a;»,  which  am  firength,  and  triumph  againi 
tiiiite  enemies,  and  fo  agamji  the  enemies  of  thofe  that  pit  their  truji  in  me  :  And  fiiall  be,  becanfe 
I  am  ]u\i,  and  be.aiife  it  is. 

For,  that  I  am,  1  am,  and  my  fpirrt  if  jujiice  and  truth :  which  before,  w.ts,  it,  and  jhall  be,  ani 
after,r!'orld  without  end. 

A.  Lord,  fhcw  IS  the  light  of  thy  countenance,  and  be  not  wrathful]  againft  us  any  longer^ 
be  a  comforter  unto  us  in  our  journey  to  be  undertaken. 

......  ^tove  me  not,  for  I  am  gone. 

E.  K.  He  is  gone. 

A.  Mifericordia  Domini  fit  fuper  no?,  nunc  &  in  fempiterna  feculorum  fecula.     Amen. 


ANNO     1584. 
On  Wednefday  the  firft  day  oi  Augnft,jiX.  afternoon  (hora  3.)  we  ciitred  on  our  journey  to- 
ward Prace.,  in  the  Kinr.domofBf-iWf,  whither  we  came  on  thurfdyy  fevcnitlit  afterjby  three 
of  the  Clock,  that  is  exaftly  in  eight  daycs. 

.  We  came  by  Coach,  1,  E.  K.  and  his  brother,  and  Edmond  Hihon  ,  fo  that  we  came  to 
Prage  Augufti  9.  by  the  new  Calender  :  but  by  the  o\dJulj  30.  two  dayes  before  .4«g«jf  the 
old  Calender^ 

CMifererc  Nojiri  Dens  Nofier  neque  in  eternunt  irafcaris  nobis. 


PRAGE        1584. 

Ai'gvJh  15.  Wednefday,  we  begation  the  day  of  the  affimption  of  the  b!  efl~ed,  Vi  rgin  M^rj: 
in  the  excellent  little  Stove,  or  Study  of  \;.  Hageck^his  houfe  lent  me,  by  Bethlevt  in  old 
Prage.  Which  Study  feenied  in  times  pjft  (Anno  1518.)  to  have  been  the  Study  of  fome  Stu- 
dentjor  A--  skilf  11  of  the  holy  ftonera.nanie  was  in  divers  places  of  the  Study ,notcd  in  letters 
of  Gold,  and  Silver,  5/wo«  BaccaluM.r.us  Pr/?gf»/'-«i  ^nd.  among  other  things  manifold  written 
very  fairly  in  the  Study  (and  very  \nany  Hieroghphical  Notes  Philofphical,  in  Birds  ,  Fiihes, 
Flowrs,  Fruits,  Leaves,  and  fix  Veffels,  as  for  the  Philofophers  works)  thefe  verfes  were  over 
the  door. 

Immortale  Veens  far  gloriaque  illi  dehentur 
Cujus  ab  ingenio   e'f  difcoler  hk  paries. 

Andof  the  Phlofophers  work  (on  the  South- fide  of  the  Study)  in  three  lines,  uppermoft 
was  this  written. 

Candida  fi  rubeo  mtilier  n'.'pta  fit  marito  :  Max  completntnti'r  ,  Complexa  concipiuntur.  Per  fe 
foIvunfHr,per  fe  quandoque  perficiuntur :  Vt  diwfjux  fuerant,  vnum  in  corpore  fiant :  Sunt  du£  res 
frimo,  Sol  cum  Luna,  tamen  m  it»o,  Confice,  vidcbis,  fit  ab  hits  lapis  (jtioque  Kebm. 

Lin£  potentate  ,  per egit  Sol  Fidis  aW*  :  Sol  adtt  Lmtam  per  mediiim,rem  facit  wiam.  Sol 
tendtt  Velum,  tranfit  per  ecliptica  Ccelrim  :  Currit  ubi  Luna  recurrit  htsnc  denuo  fublima,  Vt  fhi 
lux  detur  ,  in  fole  qv£  retrnetur.  Nee  abiit  vere  ,  fed  vult  ipft  comnianere  :  il/ujirans  certe  de~ 
fvndum  corpvs  aperre  :  Si  Rebus  fcires,  quid  ejfet  tti  rcperires.  Hxc  ars  eji  car  a,  brevis,  hvis  atque 
rara.  Ars  nojira  tji  Ludi^s  putro,  labor  mnlieriim  ',  fcitote  omna  filii  artis  hujus  ,  qu  d  neme  poteji 
colligere  frudus  noftri  Elixtris,nifi  per  nitroitum  noiiri  lafidii  Element ati,  etfi  aliam  viam  queriU 
viam  nunq'iam  intrabit  nee  attinget.  Kvhigo  eji  Opus,  quod  fit  ex  fAo  axtro ,  dum  httraverit 
in  fitam  humiditatem.       And  fo  it  ended. 


MYSTE- 


^  true  % ;  lation  of  jy .  Dee  his  J&icns  mth  fpirits,d<,c  1 1 3 


MYSTERIORUM  PRAGENSIUM 

.  hiber  Trimus^   Capreufijne,  Anno  1584, 

Stylo  [\(jyo. 

Angujii  15.  inca'ptJis  ad  Omnipotentis  Dei  Landem,  Honorem, 

^  Gloriam.     Amen. 


leri  poteft,  quod  anhi  1588,  &  aliorumfupputatio,  initiiim  fuiim  Iia- 

bent  ab  ipfa  die  Palfioiiis  Chrifti  Yel  AfcenlionU  in  C^luni.    Atque  cm]eftura  It- 
hac  latione,^^,  vel  54.  anni  pliircs  con(iderari  debent  :  quia  tot  zn- viuU. 
noiiini  c.hriftus  eiac  tempore  fu^panionis,  vel  afcenllonis :   Addas 
igiturannis  1588,  34.  &  inde  emergunt  anai  1622  .  atqueifteiuime- 
x\\<^  propius  accedit  ad  tempui  atinoruni  dilavii  8c   Arce,  ciijiis  li-  ^v^f^  de  AnnOp 
miUtudiuera  fore   circa  fecuuduni    ChrilU   adventuni  Scripture  88, 
docenc : 

Vel,  cum  port  creatiim  Adamiim,  Anno  Mund,  11^55,  Diluvium 
Aqu.e,    omnia  deleverit  viventia  :  Poft  Chrifti,  (  iioftri  Adami 
fpiririi'lis  )  reftitutionem in  Caelum.  Anno  1^5';    (qui  crit   anno   1688.)  expcftamus  Dilu- 
vium ii:ni>,  quo  omnia  fuuc  Immuunda:  vel  Chantads  8c  ardoiis  ChrilHani  magnum  futu- 
rum  ipccinscn. 

Non  facier  Dominus  B  E7^  S  verbum,  nifi  revelaverit  Sccretum  fuum  ad  fervos  fuos,  uro- 
pheias.     Leoiugiet,  quis  non  timebit?  Dominus  Deus  loquucus  ell  :   Qjiis  non  prophetabit  ? 

Aifios,  Cap.  3.  B. 
Nihil  mali  invenimus  inhomine  ifto  :     Quid  fi  fpiritus  locutus  eft  ei,  auc  Aiigelus  ?     A3, 
A^oji.  Cap.  23     C. 

Dico  enim  vobis  quod  multi  Prophets,  8c  Reges  voluerunt  videre,  qux  vds  videtis,  &  non 
viderunt  ;  8c  audirc  qua;  audicis,  &c  non  audierunt.     Lucx  10.  E.  A^titthxi  13  B. 

CharilTimi,  nolireomnt  SpirituI  credere  :  Sed  probate  Spiritus  fi  ex  Deo  fint :  quoniam 
iniilti  pfeudopropheto",  exierunt  inmundum.  In  hoc  cognolcitur  Spiritus  Dei.  Omnis  Spi- 
ritus qui  contiteturJefumChriftum  in  carae  veniffe,  ex  Deo  eft,  &c.  Johannes  Epi;ioU  i. 
cap.  4.  A. 

Qu^ifquis  confefTus  fuerltj  qudniani  Jefus  eft  filius  Dei,  Deus  in  eo  manet,  &  ipfc  in  Deo, 
^c.     Cap.  eodem  C. 

Pauluf  ad  Corinthioa,  Epijiola,  I  Cap.  I.  b^ 
Gratias  Jlgo  Deo  mco  Temper  pro  vobis,  in  gratia  Dei,  qu:E  data  eft  vobis  in  Chrifto  Jefu, 
quod  in  omnibus divites  fa£ki  cftis  inillo,  in  omni  verbi  8c  omni  fcientia  (  ficut  telHinonium 
Chrifti  contirmatum  eft  in  vobis  )  ua  ur  nihil  vobis  deik  in  uUa  gratia,  Expeftantibus  reveU- 
tionemDomim  no\iri  Jtfu  Chriii^  qui  &  coniirmabit  vos  «/"/«?  in  finem  fine  cri>nine,  in  die  Ad- 
ven:m  domini  no'-ri  lefu  Chrifti.  Fidelis  Deus  per  quem  vocati  eftis  in  Societatem  Filii  ejus  ^  .  _  ,. 
Jefu  Chrifti  Domini  noftri,e^r.  *^  Sottas M«. 

A.  Noto  Revelationem  Sc^dventum  Chrifti  fecundum  :  deinde  confirmationem  quae  re- 
fpicit  alium  adhuc  finem  teniporis  :  unde  de  Regno  Chriiihic  in  ffj-rif,fecundum  Joaniiis  Apo- 
calypiim,  videri  polllt  hie  locus  aliquem  prxbere  guftiim,  &c. 

Taulus  ad  Corinthios^  Epijl.  1  cap,  1.  V, 

Qus  ftulta  funt  mund'i,  ekgtt  Deus,  ut  confundat  fapientcs  :  &  infirma  miindi  elegit  Deus» 
m  confundat  fortia  :  8c  ignobilia  mundi,  &  contemptibiiia  elegit  Deus,  &  ea  q-e  non  funt  uC 
eaquxfnnt  deftrueret,  ut  non  gloiiecur  omnis  caro  in  conlpeftu  ejus.  Ex  ipfo  aiitera  voi 
.eftis  in  Chrifto  Jefu,  qui  faftus  eft  nobis  fapientia  a  Deo,  &  Juftii:ia,&  Sanftilicatio  8c  Rc- 
deaiptio.     Ut,  queniadmoduin  fcriptumeft.     Qn,i  gloriatur,  in  Domino  glonetur, 

[  e  e  ]  Faulus 


.^..« .11*  Ml-- 


2 1 4       ^ true %eiation of  Tl)\  Tkciis  JBions  mthjpmts,  &c. 


.-n'^'-p  ■:::■'-'.       PaulusiU'Coriftthios^Ep'jl.  t.  cap.   2.  C.  '  c^iq 

Nobis  aiitem  revelatDeiis  per  Spiiiciim  fiium  :    Spiritus  eiiim  omnia  fcriitatur,  etianips^. 
fiinda Dei,  d^c.     VidcprdEcedencia  Stfequeiuiain  eodein  capite. 


■U' 


Prag;e.     Prima  Aftio,   Aff«o    1584. 
j^      Wedenfday  ,    At^g^ti  15.    M7«p  /^!jr/?w  circiter  p.  iifiifl  -jl  I 

A.  We  tfianked  God  for  his  fafe  biinginj;  us  hither,  to  the  place  appointed  by  him  :  We 
delired  liim  to  direft  u?,  as  the  reft  of  our  Aftion  requireth  :  And  thirdly,  for  the  Book  with 
filver  leavesj  to  be  prepared,  we  required  iiiftniftion,  as  we  were  promifed.  •  1  >  ,i» 

Anon  after  £.  K.  his  lookini;  into  the  Shew-  itons,  he  faid,  I  fee  a  Garland  of  white  Rofe- 
buds  about  the  border  of  the  Stone  :  They  be  well  opened,  but  not  full  out. 

A,  The  great  mercies  of  God  be  upon  us;  and  we  befeech  him  to  incrcafe  our  faith  ia 
him,  according  to  his  well  liking. 

£.  K.  Amen 

E.  K.  But  while  I  confider  thefc  buds  better,they  fcem  rather  to  be 

white  Li- lies.  '/ 

L.  The  trernal  God  of  his  infinite  mercies,  wipe  away  our  blacknefle  and  fins,  and  make 
us  pure,   and  whiter  than  Sn;>M^.  \\ 

A.riAngtis.  £  K.  They  are  72  in  number  ;  feeming  with  their  \\Q2i*\s(altcrKatini) 
one  to  bend  or  hang  toward  me,  and  another  toward  you.  They  feem 
atfo  to  move  circularly  toward  the  Eaft ;  but  very  flowly.  In  the 
middcft  of  this  Circle,  appeareth  a  little  fire,  of  the  colour  of  yern, 
hot,  ready  to  melt  :  from  which  fire  to  every  pne  of  the  laid  lillics,  k» 
fiery  beam  extended  i  whi.h  beam  toward  the  end,  is,  of  more  whiti/h 
fiery  colour,  than  it  is  near  the  center. 

^     A  'voice.  -...  E.  K.   A  voice  comcth  fliouting  out  from  the  Lillics, 
faying,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy  :  and  all  the  lillies  are  become  on  fire:,  and 
feem  to  tumble  into  that  fire.    And  now  they    appear  again  dif^inctlyj 
as  before:  And  the  fire  remained  in  the  center  ftill :   and  the  emana- 
tion of  beams,  came  from  it,  Hill  to  the  forefaid  liljy  buds. 

E.  K.  I  hear  a  found,  as  though  it  were  of  many  waters,  poured  OE 
ftreaming  down  in  the  clifts  of  great  Ro:ks  and  Mountains  :  The 
noife  is  marvellous  great,  which  f  hear  coming  through  the  Stone  :  ^as 
it  were  of  a  thoufand  water-mills  going  together.  i 

A  voice £/r. 

Another  voice Seemeth  to  pray  over,  &  quo  moio  eji. 

A  voice Male  &  mfHrntio  :    &  nifnf'rutitm  eli. 

E.  K.  1  hear  a  great  roaring,  as  if  it  were  out  of  a  Cloud,  over  ones, 
head  :  mofl  perfe6ily  like  a  thunder.  v 

Another  voice l^he  Seal  is  broken. 

A    »/j    A.  ,  1  ^r.,.  ,^    ,e  f.j  Another Pour  e  out   the  fixth  Viol  I  thtU  the  earth  tday 

C^.  Vide  Apncalypjeits,  ttp.    \6.  jed  .  ,       r  rr    r  \t-    t     c-  ~i 

vidaur  qmd  non  feq^enter  ordm. ,  ve-  Knowher  felf  [  Viola  Sexta.  ] 
hit  qms  ex  texiu  ]udKatet ;   .^ft  nan  Thcfe  are  the  daycs  of  wo,  that  are  Spoken  of. 

t::^.d!i:^:;£:rt!;r^        £•  ^--Now  I  (be  beyond  nke  a  Furnace- 
aitar:fiint:  m^ydum  itii erat omcfjfum,    mouth,  as  bi^f  as  A  Or  <    Gatcs  of  a  Citw    It 

<^e.  Sithicdtcifoujt.  r.  .  ,C(  ~1  J  ^       '    r 

leemeth  to  be  a  quarter  or  a  mile  orr  :  out  or 
the  Furnace-mouth  feemeth  a  marvellous  fmoke  or  fmother  to  come. 
By  it  feemeth  to  be  a  great  Lake  of  pitch  :  and  it  plaveth  or  fimpreth, 
as  water  dothj  when  it  bcginneth  to  fcethc.     There  ftandeth  by  the 

pit, 


..■  ~~ ■ \        :  f V 

A  trueB^eiation  ofY)\  Dee  his  ABions  mthfpirits,  »5cc,       21  «^ 


pit,  a  white  man,  in  a  white  garment  tucked  up  :  his  face  is  marvellous 
fair  ',  he  faith  very  loud. 

A  white fpiritual  Crcatme Afcertd. 

E.  K.  Now  there  cometh  out  of  the  Lake,  a  thing  like  a  Lion  in 
the  hinder  parts,  and  his  fore  part  hath  many  heads ,  of  divers  fafliions : 
and  all'^on  one  trunk  of  a  neck.  He  hath  like  feathers  on  his  neek. 
He  hath  7  heads  :  Three  on  one  fide,  and  three  on  another,  and  one 
in  theitiiddle  :  which  branch  from  the  neck  is  longer  than  the  other, 
and  lieth  backward  to  his  taile-ward.  The  white*man  giveth  him  a 
bloody  Sword  :   and  he  taketh  it  in  his  forefoot. 

Lu  fiThe  white  man  tyeth  this  Monfter  his  4.  legs  with  a  chain,  that  he 
cannot  go,  but  as  one  (hackled,  or  fettred.  Now  he  giveth  the  Mon- 
,ftcr  a  great  hammer,wdth  a  fcal  at  that  end  where  the  hammer  ftriketh, 
--and  the  other  is  fafliioned  like  a  hatchet. 

.'     Tfae  white  man  faid.  ...;..  A  horrible  and  terrible  head ...... 

•E.  K.   This  the  white  man  faid  with  a  loud  cry. 
J,      .  • 

A  voice  out  of  the  little  fire Seal  hint,  for  two  years  of  the  Seven:    For,  fo  Utig  is 

bit  power. 

"the  Stars,  with  the  Edrthi  even  to  the  third  part,  are  given  unto  thee:    ^he  fourth  fart  tbott 
jhaJt  leavt  untouched, 

E.  K.  The  white  man  taketh  the  hammer  ,  and  flriketh  him  in  the 
forehead  of  that  head  which  is  in  the  middle,  and  lieth  down  backward 
toward  his  taile. 

JE.   K.  Now  all  this  vifion  is  vaniflied  away.    The  Stone  is  clear. 

E.  K.  Now  M^^z/;/i  appeareth,  and  (he  feemcth  to  be  bigger  than 
flie  was. 

Madimi The  hle^ingof  God  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  (in  the  Father  and  the  Son)  of  the 

Holj  Ghoft,  in  power  and  comfort  reji  vponyou,  takfhold  of  you,  and  dwell  with  you,  that  you  may 
be  apt  to  receive  thecomf on  of  my  childijhnejfe  ?  and  the  reward  of  fucb  Innocents,  as  my  voice 
leareth  witneffe  of.  fou  loth,  the  Spirit  of  God,  falvte  you:  which  alwayei  comfortetb  thejuft, 
and  ii  the iirength  and  {lay  of  fuch  Hs  are  EleUed:  of  wh,nt  it  is  faid,  Mittam  illis  Angelnm, 
in  Adjiitorium. 

L.    Are  you  Madimi  (  in  the  name  of  Jefus )  that  I  may  fo  note  of  you  > 

"Mad I  am  Maditai,  and  of  that  order,  wherein  the  wonders  of  God  are  wrofight  vrith  ^.       . 

power,  with  you,  as  wy  words  are  :  with  my  felf,  as  my  creation  is.  Madimi  eji  ex 

Le,  as  I  have  often  t^  froini]edyou,jo  in  the  time  of  yojir  ne^ejjity  and  grief,  I  viptyou,  ^^ 

■  \    h.  Thanks  be  to  the  Higheft.  *  Vide  i5. 

Mid.  ^....,  Nit  as  the  friends  of  the  world  do,   hut  as  a   comforting  fpirit :  exalting  the  fer-  funii. 
vants  $f  God,  and  cheriffjiHg  them  with  relejiial  food :    But   my  mother  is  at  hand,  "which  op eneth  MsterMiditai. 
unto  thee,  the  will  of  God.     Believe  me,  many  are  the  woes  of  the^  world,  and  great  are  the  for- 
rowi  that  ire  to  come  :      For  the  Lord  prepareth  hit  Rain-bow,   and  the  witnejfes  of  his  account :  The  Rainbow. 
and  will  appear  in  the  heavens  to  finijh  all  things  :  and  the  time  is  not  long.  Apocal'iff.  4. 


Sleffed  are  thofe  that  believe  ;  for  faith  /halt  flee  from  the  Earth,aitd  her  dwelling  places  Jhall  be  p  ■  h  (T,  11 
caves,  and  unknown  mountains,  and  inparts  of  the  Earth  which  the   Lord  hath  kfpt  fecret  for  y^^l^u    be 
;  fuch  Mfliall  triumph  andrejoyce  in  the  Judgement  to  come.  found  on  tfic 


I.  If^o  be  to  women  great  with  child,  for  they  Jhall  bring  forth  Monfter s.  Earth. 

^■1.  JFo  be  unto  the  Kings  of  the  Earth,  for  they  jhall  he  beaten  in  a  Mortar. 
'■3.  JTo  be  unto  fuch  as  paint  tkemfelves ,  and  are  !il{e  unto  the  Trince  of  pide  ;  for  thej  fhall 
drink^  the  blood  of  their  neigkbi^urs,  and  of  their  own  children. 

4.   IVo  be  mto  the  falfe  preachers,  yea  feven  woes  he  unto  them  ;  for  they  are  the  teeth  of  the 
Beajt. 

He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear.  Seven  Woesi 

,    'i.  Wobe  unto  the  Virgins  of  the  Earth,  for  they  Jhall  difdain  their  virginity,  and  they  Jhall  be 
come  CoHCubius  for  Satan,  and  defpife  the  God  of  Righteoufneffe. 

[  e  e  2  ]  .    6.m 


2 !  (5        (tA  true  flatten  of  r>^  Dee  his  JlHions  vehh  ffWits^  6c c. 


.  \"   -6.    ft^o  be  t/tito  the  Merchants  of  the  earth  ,for  they  are  become  ab/wiuable  :  Behold  ,  they  tire  be' 
rowe  thefpiescf  the  earth  ,  andthe  dainty  meat  of  Kings.    But  they  are  foohjh  :  ieaythej  jhntl  ftiU 
inttfthe  pit  that  they  have  digged  for  others 
Mt    M  d-  '    7-  f^  0  ^^  '"'«  '^^  ^"''^^  °}  ^^*  earth,for  they  are  cerru^ted ;  and  are  become  a  wrafiingftock^.,  and 
firebrand  re  the  confcience. 

Stay  a  f:^f9Hiforp^^mothep^cometb.  -, 

6.  VVc  reaJ  over  the  prcmifTes,  and  fo  conferred  of  the  verity  and  weight  ofjLptn.  And 
all  t  is-  while  Mtdmh  ftood  ftill  in  E  F.  his  fight  (as  £  K.  told  me  :  j  But  became  we  were 
%villed  toftaj-,  I  moved  no  quefiion  :  bm  wirtied  to  have  (onic  iii)derfianding,how  my  wifeand 
childieh  (at  Cracoviaj  did.        Here-  pon  Midi^t  faid  as  followech. 

My  Wif-  ^''"^ tleur  ithat  I  fey  unto  thee  [a.J  The  King  of  darkjttjfe  whetteth  his  teeth  againji  thee, 

tcnipteJ  todc-  and  ramYeihxtith  great  rage  toovervrhe'm  ihe  world  upon  thee:  And  he  feeketh  the  dejiruttioit  of 
ftioyhcr   fclf.  thylo'Jhcld^and  iher-.hy  thy  cverthrow:7he  life  of  thy  Children  -y  yeu^  he  tempt  eth  thy  wif e  viih  de* 
fp^ir,  and  to  I'e  violent  imto  her  felf. 
A.  Why  With  defpair?] 
......  Bpt  his  lips  are  feuld^and  his  claws  made  dull:  thatwhen  he  would  bite  he  cannot  :  And 

vhere  he  fcratchcththe  bloud  foli'owth  not- 

But  bear  wh.it  thy  {ciend  fayeth  unto     thee  :  Both  in  her  felf  y  and  by  him 

Madam't,rny  friend,     j^^f  moveth  her  tofpeah^'.  As  thou  art  the  ftrvant  of  the  Ood  fviljo^'y^f.  (halt 

thou  triumph  i«  t;!;e  Gu^^o/ ftrecchfoith  and  Conquer.      A.    Madzijodarpi, 

in'^rhe  i^^'  iMinnlu     ^*->  '^'Z'"'  ^''-^  cA;7//rf«,  thy  fervaHts,  and  more  then  that,  fuch  at  favo-^r  ih  e. 

Call  bte  nnii.p    /,  v.-     *'^'>'  ^^^  coverings  of  thy  honfe  ;  are  under  the  protection  and  defence  of  fich  its 

malpait.  SAir.an  tilt,     are  of  power :  againji  whom^  neither  the  rage  of  fuch  as  raij^n,  neither  the  fury 

i;e,  ef  Authority  (jhovgh  it  hath  the  help  of  Satan  J    an  prevail,  F  r  why  ?    God 

hath  care  over  thee  :  Bit  thy  faith  is  fovewhat  lower.    Jake  heed  of  Sat  any 

Satan '-is  Trsiterom     Jtf  w^// joyn  ;&iw/>// 1  nto  thce.  B't  bfware  of  him.      Fi^r,  j/w  k  eepeth  back 

infinuauun  «o  be  taken     ^^^^  ^^^.^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^ .  .^  .^  oftentimes  deferred  for  antther  feufon  :  lea^  even 

for  ike  wicl{ed»<ffe  of  one  Sojil. 

A.L.  LasVy   J  lno\  for,  Ivt  I  fee  not :  Bthold^Iwrafi  my  eyes  after  hi>»i  and  cannot  fiiidehim.     Per- 

adventure  he  huth  hidhimfelf  behinde  fome  Mountain^  or  is  crept  tnto   a  Lave:  for  he  appeareth 

not. 

L.    T  befecch  yon,  what  is  the  caufe  thereof?  Is  he  not  gone  from  Crac^^via? 

Mad.  .....Stn  if  the  gr e at eji  Mountain  ^  and  he  rejoyceth  when  he pleaftth  hmtfelf;  and  in  tht 

fury  of  hh  flejh  creepeth  into  a  C-ve  fr^m  us.  " 

LoyI  loo'{  tor  him,  and  ca}tmt  fee  himjyet  fee  all  the  world  over  J    Itk 

leeth  a'l  the  wotld  over.  .il/l.;i.  r  ^  •-..•. 

A,    J  beleech  yoU,ishenot  gonefrom  Crtfcci/*/ yet? 

Mad I  ell  thee^I  ftchtmnoi  il  i,anfay  nothtngof  bim. 

t.    Lord,  our  coming  hither  was  ro  come  with  him. 

Mzd. .....Th  re  fore  bro'ight   I  thee  hither,  that  thai   fhouldft  nor  tarry  with  him.        Knowed 

thou  not   that  God  ii  m  rve  loiu  in  his  workj  ?  Haji  thou  not  hmrd  of  his  fe.ret  judgements  ?    tf 
thou  hajiy  Think  he  hath  care  ever  thee. 

,     , .. ,  ,        For  alfo,thy  wife  and  chi  Idrenyand  the  refi  of  thy  houfhold  mull  be  moved 

My  wife,  child- en,  nna     J.,j[[.,gp^    ^        ^       j  ^  i      j      j 

toerage.  ^-    When,  1  befcech  you  ? 

Mad Let  that  be  my  c'-^arge  to  anfwer  thee. 

E.  K.  Now  here  appeareth  a  little  fire  like  the  fame,  which  appea»'ed 
before  :  but  it  hath  no  beams  from  it,  as  it  had  before.  4 

Mad Hie  &  h£c,  eft  Miter  ma.  J^E.K.   Pointing  to  the  fire.J 

Mater  Madi-       E*  ^'    ^^^^  fallcth  down  on  her  face  proftrate  :  Now  (he  rifcth  again. 
""'•  This  fireentreth  into  her  mouth,  /he  is  waxen  of  higher  ftature  then  flie 

Trjniqr.        was,  flie  hath  now  three  faces. 

h.   Now  it  is  the  vertueof  the  Trinity  in  her  fo  reprefented.  arfgUEi 

■    Mad. ....7.    And  I  have  a  few  things  t  J  faf,  and  I  fay.  "' 

E.  K.  I  hear  a  marvellous  noi{e,as  of  many  Mountains  falling.  - 

Mad Arife,and  lelieve.         The  time  if  come,    that  of  the  foolifl}  1  will   mak/  the  wifti^ 

If,  An'l  »f  fxc'}  as  are  linfull  men,  my  anointed  :  if  they  encline  their  ear  unto  myvoyce.  ''^* 

£.  K .  The  no yfe  is  mat  vellous:  And  which  of  the  mouthirdoth  ipeak^ 
I  cannot  diicern.  '  -^^  *»•*»  ^^'^'^  ^^^'^  c*^»^- 

Mad. 


J  true  Relation  of  D''.  Dee  his  JBions  mtb  fpirits,  6c g.        zi7 


Mad Fir/?,  thoujhalt  vrite  unto  Rodulphus,  as  I  Jhall  enfpire  thee._        "then  Jh  a  It  thou  go  KOHOL- 

mto  hiytJy  f^ji»&}  '^hat  the  Angel  of  ihe  Lor  d  hath  appeared  unto  thee. f  H  U  S. 

^^ \_E.K.  A  greatnoyfeftill.] 

~And  rcbuketfi  nirii  for  his  (ins.        \T  never  heard  anyfuch  ntyfe  :  it  it  at  if  half  the  loorld  were 

rufhing  down  an  hilL']  _     . 

Mad If  he  hear  thee  :  Then  faj  unto  him.,  He  fhall  triumph  ,  tear  thee  not.         A.  Eichcr  E.K.  y  ,_  ^^^ 

Jf  he  hear  thee  not: S ay ^that,  7he  Lord,  the  God  that  made  heaven  and  earthy     fp«J<e  not  this,  or  E 

'C under  whom  be  breathethy  and  hath  his  fpirit')  putteth  his  foot  againji  his  hreall.     on>'^«d  to  write  ic 

.[  [£.ii:.  Agreatnoyfeilill.]    *"'''''^- 

And  Will  throw  him  hettdlmg  from  his  feat.  ,.-.,,^  jj    jf 

Lo,thnf(Ifwearu>nothee')Iwilldo.     1(  he  forfti\e  his  wickfdnejft  ,  and  turn        Dei  J^ramentum 
'.  unto  me :  His  feat  fljallbe  the  greateji  that  ever  was,    and  the  Devil  Jhall  become      ^  l^allum  cum  ^^ 
his  prifener.  de  R. 

E.  K.  There  came  great  flaflies  of  fire  out  of  her, and  fo  out  of  the 
iionc  :  and  fiiddenly  fhe  was  in  her  former  fhape  again. 

A.  In  the  name  of  Jefus. 

Mad Where  this  vojce  etttrethy  no  man  hath  to  fay :  For  it  is  the  beginning  ,  fo  it  is  likfwife 

the  end. 

Therefore  enquire  not  any  more  now,  but  ceafe  :  For  this  is  the  mar-  The  marvellous  beginning 
'yellous  beginning  of  this  laft  time.  "^ '*>'»  laft  time. 

...A.  AH  thanks.  Laud,  Honor,  Glory,  and  Empire  be  to  the  Eternal,  OmnipotenCj  and  our 
onely  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth.    Amen. 


ThurCdzy,  Augufti  16.   1584.     Mane,circiterhoram^\.        t  Pragc. 
A.  Precihiif  finitisj  I  propounded,  as  concerning  the  book  to  be  prepared  for  the  Angelical 
writing,  &c.  And  becaufe  Mapfama  had  dealt  about  that  poipt  i  Therefore  I  required  at  God 
his  hands,  the  Miniftery  of  Mapfama  herein  :  if  it  were  his  will. 

E.  K.  Here  is  Madami. 

A.  Bleffed  be  the  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  who  rcgardeth  the  fincere  intent  of  his  fil- 
ly ones. 

Mad.  .....  When  feed  time  is  pafl,  who  fewethhis  Corn  ?  Or.  what  is  he  amtngli  men  that  calletb 

hack^  the  Sun  a  minute  ?  S«  may  it  be  faid  of  you,  which  were  flacky  in  fowing,  and  therefore  have  let 
faffe  the  benefit  of  timey  wherein  your  feed  might  have  mult  if  lied.  Beheld,  your  labours  are  in  vai»y 
in  refped  of  that  you  might  have  received. 


is  paji  with  jou  the  firji   da;  :  And  Mz^tfami  wanteth,  not  by  himfelf ,  hut  M-rifama 
;  whofe  fingers  wrought,  and  made  an  end  of  anothers  workt  which  was  tied       ^ 


^, , .......  For  Auguft 

'through  your  negligence . 
$0  time. 

h  Nalvage  wat  beaten  bac\fremyou  :  But  you  confider  not  his  eonflilf,  neither  thank,  God  for  that 
be  bath  finijhed  for  you  :  with  whom  [Nalvage]  now, you  have  no  power.  For  the  Receiver  and 
■Giver  for  that  time,were  of  time. 

But  to  the  entent  that  the  Heavens  may  agree,    (becaufe  they  are  the  light  of  him,  which  is  the  A  paper  book 
fiSf't  of  his  father^  I  fay  unto  thee  that  thou  mu(i  prepare,  of  fair^  and  decent  paper  ,  a  book..    To  to  be  prepared. 
'jhe  entent, that  the  paper  itfelf  may  hear  witnejfe  againji  you  :  and  receive  that,whichJhouU  have 
leen  printed  in  Gold. 

fi.    God  he  knovveth,  and  the  Heavens,  that  I  did  the  beft  I  could,  to  have  had  the  book 
filvered. 

J^ad It  is  fo  :  I  will  bear  witneffe  with  thee.        But  where  the  watch-men  fleep,   and  do  not 

their  duety :  Theft  taketh  places  and  the  enemies  wak.e  havock.. 

The  fins  of  Lasky  are  not  a  few ;  yea,  they  are  fuch  as  have  brought  in  the  Prince  of  Thieves,which 
had  prevailed :  But  God  was  watch-man  at  the  inner  doors .  For,  he  deubted  of  thy  faith,  and 
laughed  God  to  skorn.  But  hear  the  voice  of  him  that  fitteth :  Leapers  and  defiled  people  ufe 
not  to  carve  at  a  Kings  Table  :  for  when  his  Carvers  become  Leapets,  they  are  not :  becaufe  they  arc 
expelled. 

'  Even  fo  into  my  Chambers,  and  fecret  judgements  entretb  not  the  Jncredulous  ,  Proud,  and 
SkomfuU  finners.  But  becaufe  he  became  worfe  then  a  Leaper,  I  hanijhed  him  out  of  my  Chambers, 
for  I  am  more  then  a  King. 

Kotwith'^anding,  becaufe  I  have  fworn  unto  thee  for  him  ,  I  will  fuffer  him 
teihe  exalted  :  But  in  the  midji  of  his  Triumph  he  Jhall  fall,  at  a  proud  Tree     f''y'ran'ium^'"i 
doth,  whofe  roots  are  wncertain.  v<^e,frt,  a.L.^^  ^  . 

And 


111.       A  true  Relation  o/D^  Dee  his  jBions  nit  h /pints,  &c. 


Mifericird'/M 
Dei  fufer  a. 

Cum  Imperore 

Kod. 

VTofbtttiitti,, 


A»d  because  thou  hali  believed  vie  ,  and  bafi  not  murmured  agamfi  me,  I  will  be 
juji  vith  thee.  And  vvich  this  Emperour  (hall  be  thy  aboad.  And  through  thy  mouth 
Jhall  ffrhtg  a  Cedar-T'ree,  whofe  tip  pall  touch  the  Moon  ,  a>!d  branches  cover  the 
\enjh  of  the  field,  the  birds  of  the  Aire  ;  yea,  and  a  part  of  th?  Sens.  Becaufe  tbau 
haft  taken  pains  for  me,  iwill  deal  julily  with  thee,  and  reward  thee. 

Ike  fans  of  wickfdntjfe  are  frond,  hecaufe  of  their  promotion  5  are  fiout,   hecaufe  of   their  King- 
*  Miihei  7  D  '^«""  "^^^  V»winiotis  :  But  they,  mud  fall,  hecaufe  their  building  doth  ftand  on  *  fand. 

Do  myCommandwent,  be  not  afraid. 
Ncwlcdons.         For  1  have  new  lejfons  to  teach  thee,  and  new  hnkj  to  open,  fuch  as  have  been  fealed  in  the  wil' 
NiW  books,     derntffif, 

E.  K.  She  is  gone. 

A.   As  concerning  the  Letter  to  be  written  unto  Kodolphur,  O  Lord,  I  would  gladly  knovr 
the  Aminicntjand  when  1  fhtu'.d  fend  it. 

A  Voyce Incipienti,  dabitur.  ^.  I  und^rftand  this  thus  :  That,  when  I 

•  begin  to  write  it  fhall  be  infpired  from 

Godj  as  was  faid  before. 

A  voyce Ceafe. 

.A.    Deo  Noftro  iRimoitali,  Invifibilij  8c  Omnipotcntij  fit  omnis  honor  ,  Laus  &  Glo- 
ria :  Nunc  8c  feniper.       Amen.  '        '■ 


(JW, 


ane. 


t  Pragx, 


Ne  ditm  toram 
Angrh  Don  pf} 
Pfvidentta. 
Eeclefitfies, 
"P  J. 


Friday,  Augufli  17 

A.  Bccaufe  I  would  make  no  delay,  for  the  Letter  writing  to  the  Emperour  fio^ioj^wf  ,  | 
framed  my  felf  to  write,befeechin^  God  that  I  might  fo  write,  as  might  be  fufficient  for  the: 
purpofe,?^r.   And  thus  I  wrote  as  foUoweth. 

Omnipotentis  Noftri  Creatori<  (  '  hriltianorum  omnium  fmperatorum  fxliciflime  ,  O  Ru- 
dolphe')  tarn  eft  hominibus  incognita  ilia  ,  quie  cunfta  difponit  perficirque  PRO  VI  D  E  N- 
T  I  A  t  rataque  ipfa  rerum  feries  Sc  coordinacio  (3  primo  ad  ultimum^  quod  a  plerifque,    te- 
merCjfortritOjVel  cafu,  hoc  jUove  eveniremoioj  exiftiinencur  omnia,  qux  extra  prxtcrve  fuo-, 
rum  Confiliorum  defii'nationes,*  fieri  confpiciant.   Veiiim  quibu?  eft  mens  Divinae  veritatis  lu- 
mine  colluftrata,  &  ad  multipliers  longifque  incervallis  diftinftas  rerum  confecutioiies  confide- 
randas,  atrentior,  evidcntiflime  deprehendent  illi  quideni,  Quae,  quibus  pr<ecurri/re  ,  tauquam 
caufas,  occafionefq'  eneceffkrias,  alio  priori,  &  interdum  longe  diveriiffimo,tempore,oportue- 
rat.    Atquc  ut  varietatem  nunc  omittam  excmplorum,  (qu»,  ex  aliorum   hominum   inter  fc^ 
collatis  vitis,  conditionibus,  faftifqueadferrc  polh'm,)   txemplum  fatis  confpicuum   hoc  uni- 
cnm  fieri  poflii  :  Niminim  iila,  fincredibilis  fae)qu*  inter  facram  Cxfaream  Majcftatem  vc- 
ftram  jSi  humillimum  (in  UeoJ  Mancipium  me  veftrum  (ex  multipliclbus  utrinque  piaecut-^ 
rentibus  cccafionibusj  jamqualiiriftare  videtur.  In  unrm  (idemque  admirandum  quid)  CtMn-- 
binaiojDiviiiaque  confpiratio.     Ambiverunt  me  (Juvcneni)  IlluftrifTimi  Jmperatores  duo: 
Viftonolifljmus  ille  Carolus  §uintM,  &  ejufdem  Frater  Ferdinandus,  veftras  Cxfarex  Majeftati* 
Magnihctntiffimus  Avw.  Hic,  Pofonii,  H.unguri£  :  ille  veroj  BruxelU,Brahanti£.  Hie,  An.  1563.. 
Jlle  aittcm, /4;z«e  1549-    Aft  clementillimum  Imperatorem  MaximiHannnt  ,  C£fare£  veftrae  Ma« 
ieftatis  Patrem  (Immortali  glora  dignum)  jam  trm  Hmgsrix  coronatum  Regem,  (invitiffimo 
quidem  ipfo  Tyraniio  Turcico)  eodem  in  Po/o«  c!,codenique.  Anno  63.  in  deliciis  habere  coepi: 
illiufque  rariflimas  virtutes,cum  fidditcr  colerc,tum  pofteritati  eafdem  icdderc  comnicndatilli- 
mas,operequodamconabarHieroglyphico.Quo  etiam  in  labore  exanclan- 
do  animus  mihi  pr^fagiebai,nurtriiic\  ^tamilisjalium  fortfaliquando  all-      * LibtUi  Montiis  Hien-. 
q,  em,  in  qiK>  maxima  mea  fpes,8.  p  blico  Chr.ftianonun  ltat..,Res,ccn-    fi^ttfoTn'r:/": 
firmaretur,  (vclconhrmari  poteru,)  Opuma.  Maxmiaque,    Veftrse  igi-  ■  _V 

twrCsfarex  Maiefti,Iniperatorimi  R  ni.Tr.oriini  (ex  Auftriacorum  Principum  nobilillima  fami- 
lia)  mea  state  florentium,  §^V  ARIO:  Adfuii),  &c  ego,  Triplicis  Alphabeci,  litera  *  Qiiar- 
ta.  Atque  ita  adfim,ut  meiplum  ad  pedes  Cirfarea:  Majeftis  veftr*  aemif§^  ofculandos  oiFc- 
ram  :  plurimum  gavifurus,  fi  qua  in  re,  Chriiiians  Reipublicae  Imperatori  tanto,  taiique,gra- 
tiis,utilifve  eife  potero. 


Superfcriptio  erat  hic. 
Sereniffiitio  ac  potenfiffjf-o  Principi  ac  Vomino  Vo- 
wini  Rudolpho,D'»  Gratia  Romanonm Imperato- 
ri frnper  Augufto,jc  Gcrmani-PjHiingaria'jBohe- 
mis,&c.  iLf^^  ArchiJuci  Auftris,  Vtici  Burgun- 
diae  5rir;<e  Carinthisf^,  6-c.  Comiti  Tyroli*  ,  &c. 
Domino  meo  cUntenttfftmo. 


Veftrx  facrx  Ctfarei  Majeftati,  foli,  Jihic 
aliquandi  u  coi^fiare  patltmini(neminiqvic 
detegere  velitis )  rem  facietis  valdc  nc- 
ceflariam. 

Trag£f  An,  1584.  Angufii  17. 

C£^are£  Ma  ]e ft  if  Veftr£ 
Humilii.mus  &  fideiiffimus 
ClientuUis  ^a 

Joannes  T>et%^ 

Munday 


4 true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  Jciicns  mth  fpiricj,  &:c.       2ip 


Monday,   f  Trngx,   Angnfti  20.  Mane  circa  boram  7, 
A.    Frecibus  adVeum  fufts^  exmore  nojhoyScc. 

1.  l  propounded  :  If  the  letter  written  for  Roiolphusy    were  as  ic  ftould  be  1 
S.    Secondly,  becaufe  we  were  willed  to  invite  the  good  Angels,   for  the  book  Writting,  I 
asked  how  we  fliould  invite  them  > 

-  ^  A?  concerning  OIK- wives,  and  my  familly  fending  for  :    I  required,  when  that  fiiould 
be  dons  ' 

A.   (Viickly  apparition  was  made. 

E;  K.  Here  is  ZJrieL 

A.  Welcome  be  the  light  of  the  Hisheft. 

.  V-R.  I  E  L W-'o  he  unto  the  world  :  for  her  light  is  tak^n  aw.iy,     JVo^  wo  be  unto  vian^  fcr 

tbeeye  o^light  hath  forf>il{e>t  hif».     JVoyWohe  to  the  mtderfiandiKg  ofman,for  it  is  led  out  ^  with  a. 
threefold  fpirit,   *  the  fpir it  of  errottr  and  ignorance.     And  wo  be  unto  fueh  as   believe  *  AUqutd  de- 

uot  the  glorious  and  filpere>ttinent- light  of  this   Tejiimonj:  for  they  are  not  written  with  the  life,  ell  forte, 
neither  fball  tbeir  portion  he  with  the  living.  The  Spirit  of 

"thws  faith  he  that  is  a  mere  flone,  (  whith  fitteth  between  the  feat  of  light  anddarkjteffe  )  whofe  This  Teflimo 
ffinp -are  great  y  aul  more  than  mighty  :  wherewith  he  gathereth  the  Stars  ,  and  the  pcwers  f  Art  ny  to  be  belie 
bang  i:f.on  the  ftrmament  of  the  firji  and  leffer  light  :  pla:t,tg  them  and  powerin^;  theyn,  in  the  Spi-  ved  upon  gre.-. 
rit  of  Truth;  and  through  his  own  powers  the  power  of  the  word,  wherebr  a /I  things  are,  and  are  ^^^f^^^^^'^^'^' 
CQynprtheKded:  in  that  he  if  as  well  in  the  heavens  of  Glory,  Chafiityy  and  Mfff  ge,  as  alfo  in  t'ciyzm  o( 
piaces  hiikjro^'i  to  us.  t-ilary,  Cha* 

'Behold,  thofe  that  di^  into  Nature  with  dull  Mattockj,  and  dull  Spades,  are  fiich,as  of  every  ""^^  "^"^ '" 
congeled  f'-liance  can  imagin,  but  not  judge :  are  foo'ijh,  and  of  the  world  :  whofe  im!!gindtio::si 
I  ttre  become  the  inftrninen'-s  of  vanity,  and  the  piercers  of  him  which  it  the  father  of  ignorance.  iFo 
he'tmto'them,  for  their  difputatiens  and  doUrines,  are  dogma.'' s  and  dull.  Wo,  wo  unto  them,  for 
they  areftich  as  p'eafe  themfelves,  and  are  become  fathers  to  many  lewd  children:  of  whom  it  is 
written.  They  are  become  jiif-neck/d  and  proud,and  the  followers  of  their  father.  Ihtrefore  have 
I  gathered  -'ity  felf  together,  and  am  hidden  from  them;  becaufe  they  are  proud  and  hatets  of  inno- 
Cency..  Thefe  teach  not  unto  you  a  dodriney  neither  are  yon  partakers  of  their  Bankjts  ;  for  the 
Spirit  of  God,  it  plan,  pure,  and  moli  perfect.  Thefe J^reath  not  upon  you,  neither  are  the  Orna- 
tiients  ef  your  Garlands  enterlacedhy  th'fe  :  But  by  Kim  are  you  lifted  up,  that  is  the  God  of 
Juftice,  and  the  Difclofer  of  his  own  fecrecs  :  and  the  headlong  drawfr  of  thl>igs  to  an  end.  ^">^  t^  "s  '** 

Therefore  believ,  and  dream  not  wiith  the  world  :   For  the  world  fJhtll  perijl},   and   allherHd-^^^y^^'-'^^°^^f 
herents  :  andfl)allbecailintothepitofwocverlafiing.     Read   the   Scriptures,    and    widerjiand  ^aK. 
them:   but  icraii  them  not,   with  the  wicl\ed.     Look,  into  the  fimplicity,   and  naksd,uff(  of  God  his 
Promife.  :  View  the  innocency  of  fame  that  received  tk-em,   And  let  n-t  the  wickedncjfe  of  thofe 
\i  K^at  the  Lord  made  vertuous,  go  out  of  your  remembrance.     Bd  Co  Tri'imfleth   true  poxter,  f)  ga.- 
1  ikereth  he  himfelf  together  to  difcomfort  the  Serpent :   Of  the  lightefi  he   muKeth  tb:  heavieji,  and  of 
i  fke  weakfll  the  jirongeji :  A)fd  in  the  weakfjl  veffels,  work/th  be  hii  merry.     And  Why  .<•     Eeholdy 
^t^  the  world,  in  her  proud  im.iginatio>is,   in  the  ornaments  of  her  pearls,   and   moji  pretious  wits, 
fhwld  brag,  faying,     I  can  compare  With  the  Lord.     Hear  my  voice,  for  tt  is  of  God.      The  world 
brntgeth  forth  no  good  thing,  neither  are  the  doings  of  man  accepted',  but  where  the  fpirit  ofhumi-    Humilicy. 
lity  dwelleth.     Oat  of  the  depth  of  dnrkncffejiaih  God  made  light  :    And  lo,  the  light  is  great, and 
tbe'iarkjitffe  comprchendeth  it  not.     So,  in  the  wea\e!i  will  he  he  exalted.  .  ' 

The  Spirit  thutfpeaketb  unto  you,  is  he  that  hath  a  Tower  to  bi.ild,  ajirong  Tower  and  a  mighty, 
yea  fuch  a  one.,  as  ha:h  not  been  from  the  beginning :    No,  n  t  from  the  beginning.    Great  U  the  fo'^ai'-  Vriel  hath  2 
daiimi  thereof ;  for,  it  it  of  Iron  ;    But  greater  are  her  walls  ;  for  they  are  of  Diamond.      jVfo/?- Tower  to  build 
great' are  hn-  Turrets ;  for  they  are  the  feven  Heads,  that  behold,  judge,  and  gather  :    And  they  ^'^' 
are  ^y  aie  of  Truth,  the  Spirit  of  Eternit/.      Vnto  the  laying  of  every  fone^  areyoumade  privy^  . 
:And.-:far  this  Tower  are  you  provided.  ^^  C^.  and  E.K, 

_  I .  for  lo,  the  firn  hath  appearet^,  and  (hewed  himfelf  mightily, 

"2.  And  the  fecond  hath  redeem.-d,  and  overcome  Satan.  PnmusFifKf 

„3,  -^"^  ''^5  '^'^  third  appear  ctb,  and  (hall  vifilly  fiew  the  power  of  God  to  all  Nations.  ;?«;!"*'■  "'**' 

F^r  N-'W  Cometh  the  Defolation  of  the  World,  And  the  fall  of  her  pride.      And  this  is  the  lafi^  .,   . 
l^od  th<it  me.rfureth,   and  ihallbc  brokfn  :  For  it  is  f aid.     Now    will  1  hear  youiiom\m-^,f^'p['^^  ^^f'^ 

"  "er  the  Altar,  NiW  will  I  revenge  the  blood  of  jour  brethren.  /"fu"'!i7%'! 

On»  ignorant,  and  of  weak^  faith  :    Knorryou  mt  the  times  that  are  to  come  ?     O  youthat  /j^it ^P^'c-ilypf.cap. 
at  the  meat  of  cowf..rt  :  yea  when  it  is  put  lovingly  into  your  mwths.     Why  are  yon  f-jfrowful .?  '^" 
l}yre]oyceyo't  not,thij:  the  God  of  Juliice  if  girded,  avdhath  whetted  hiffrord,   itpnt  a  thoiifand 
ol^Mud  Mountains  of  fire  ?     Why  lattgh  yot*  not  the  world  to  farn  ?  and  deride  her  fornication  ? 
Weep  not  upon  her  ;  forpe  it  accurfed  :  Neither  wonder  at  her  j  for  pje  will  be  more  wonderful. 

Toti 


2o6      A  tme%ehuon  of  T>\  Dee  his  Anions  mthjjitnts,  &ic. 


You  have  received  t/j/i  Doftrine  in  Cliambers,  and  w  fecret 
A.  EcdeMe^.  ':''"f«  f.;^3  r!''ce.^  :  But  it  (hall  ftand  in  the  great  City  :  a„d  upon  7  Hills, 
S;-Mr;o«  (fciiSi  Matth.  17.  B.  and  (iiall  eftablifh  her  lelf  in  truth  :  P,vr/^Mif  w<i//i,  «K^ /B'fe;) 
Marc.  9.  B  1  uc  9.B.  ii.  A.  C(iri|?<ir.  o;^t  f/je  riw/f  <rw^  cobv-'ehs  (  t/^e  woriy  of  the  veneniotis  )  t/.?/zt  /r  may 
Et  p7,p:ikhlnihx\ct<(<.  le.  C.^W  j^g  caliinto  the  Kiver,  andb^ought  into  no  remembrance, 
in  »ure  iui'i'us,  pvedioaie  f lifer  icOa,  j^^^  -^  jj^all  fit  m*  Jofaphat ,  in  Judgement,  againjl  the 
^\-}'^{'  [Ip  ,  .vcicksd)  andjball  become  a  fire  eng^dred  in  the  rave  of  Thm- 

t  Fear  not  ders.     Tierefore^  When  you  are  commanded,  life  v.p  your 

heads,  and  t  fear  not:   for  whom,  the  Heavens  Jhall  fight. 
Bwt  in  your  fehcs  be  patient  ^  and  continue  to  the  end  :  "That  your  Crowks  may  exceed  the  Gar- 
lands of  the  Earth. 

"thm  faith  the  Lord,  Lo,   Ih^ve  promifed  thee,  thct  vy  An- 
■f  proro'.fe  of  vifitation  for  the  4J.      gel \h all  t  vifit  thee  :    And  fo  H  pall  he.     But  if  I  now  vifit 
grcst  Calls,    and  the  Holy  Boo'.i  wri-     thee,  Ihns  ycill  theworld  fay  hereafter  ■■>   Lo,   he  hath  fained 
tine  and  prjaifine.  a  Doftiinefor  himfelf.     Lobe  txcelleth  m  fubtilty.    When  I 

c,,o.  AnnchnmeLipo  per  SpirH.n,  SS.  gavemy  laws,  they  were  not  fecret ;  neither  v^as  the  p/ace 
fuima.  '  Ep.ft.  I'aKli  ad  ihcff.  1.  unfanHified.  When  the  Comforter  cometh,girdeth  himfelf  a- 
caf.  I,  gainji  the  fon  of  *  wickedneffe ;    7hen  ntujl  you  be  known,  and 

feen  unto  the  Earth. 
A   Eleftionor      B»t  I  will  give  thee  the  choice  :  Chufe  therefore,  whether  thou  wilt  banket  Now  :  lecaiife  I  have 
Cho\ce  cfi'atdpromifed  thee  :   Or  tarry,  till  I  {ee  the  time  more,  convenient  ;   For  lo,  if  Rodolph.    hearken  unto 
to  A.  my  voice.  He  .(hall  wonder,  and  rejoyce  with  thee :  And  I  will  exalt  htm,  above  the  Kings  of  earth. 

RoDOLPHUS  Stay  a  while  :   1  come  again. 

Imp, 

A.  After  he  had  flayed  a  while,  and  read  over  the  preraifles,  and  talked  of  the  manner  of 
the  Choice  or  Eleftion  offered  :  and  the  dealing  with  R'idilph  :  we  thour.ht  good  to  be- 
feech  G'-d  to  regard  his  promife,  for  his  glory  and  hono"ry  and  we  mofl:  humbly  to  thank  him  thac 
he  would  offer  a  choice  to  me  a  man  of  no  worthineffe,  nor  wifdom  :  therefore  moft  defirous 
to  le  entredfpeedtly  intothe  School  [>/ /^/H^jw,  wherein  we  might  grow,  aiid  attend  the  oppor- 
tunities of  any  thing  to  he  doneor  faid  by  us;  So  that  (if  it  were  his  will  )  we  Were,  and 
are  defirous  ww  to  bevifited,  ashii  moft  merciful  promife  importeth. 

AVifion,  E.  K.   Now  'Vriel  is  here  i  he  hath  a  Chair,  andisfet  down  in  it: 

It  is  like  a  Throne.. 

Here  I  fee  a  green  Hill :  and  I  fee  thereon  three  men,  like  learned 
men,  in  Gowns  of  puke-colour  :  they  have  Hats  on  their  heads.  ZJnel 
hath  in  his  hand  a  thing  like  a  rolling-pin  (of  half  an  ell  lontr)  of 
Gold. 

TheGirdenof  I  fee  bcyond  the  men,  a  very  fair  Park,  enclofed  with  pale,  piked,&c. 
I  fee  Roles  and  Lillies,  and  goodly  Flowers  in  one  part  of  it ,  and  fair 
running  waters  in  it,  and  little  Hills,  and  all  manner  of  Birds :  And  in 
the  middle  of  the  Park,  is  a  turret,  and  in  the  top  of  that,  a  round 
thing  like  a  Stone,  which  giveth  light  all  the  Park  over  :  but  without 
the  Parkpale,itisduskifh  or  dark.  Thefe  three  men  ftand  together 
upon  the  pitch  ofthe  bank  of  the  Hill  that  goeth  down  towArdVrieh 
There  appear  three  diverfe  fair  wayes  to  the  Park,  two  from  the 
Hill  where  the  men  ftand,  and  one  from  the  place  about  Vricl. 

1.  I  fee  one  man  walk  in  the  Park,  und  he  pirketh  Flowcrs,and  put^ 
ting  them  to  his  mouth,  they  fmoke,  as  the  fmoke  of  the  fnuff  of  a 
candel  when  the  candle  is  put  out. 

2.  I  feelikewife  another  man  gathering  of  Flowers  there,  and  he 
would  put  the  Flowers  to  make  them  flick  on  his  Coat,  but  they  will 
not  hang  on  but  fall  down,  it  is  fo  bare 

3.  I  fee  a  third  man,  who  hath  his  Robes  all  belayed  with  lace  of 
gold,  great  and  fmall,  and  divers  pretious  Stones,  and  on  his  head  a 
wreath  like  a  Garland,  very  broad  befet  with  very  beautiful  pretious 
Stones :  and  he  trimmeth  himfelf  all  over  with  the  flowers  of  the  Park 

Of 


Comfort, 


One  of  thofe 
men  fiit'h 


J  true  Relation  of  jy.  Dee  his  /^Bi/m  n^ith  fpmts,  6c c.       lu 

or  Gard-n,       Now  tiie    three  men  arc  come  from  the  Hill,  before 
IJricl  his    feat. 

I  moft  humbly  hefeechyoH  that  I  may  have  accejfe  into  the  Garden  of  Comfort. 

Uriel ..loujha!^:  I  am  contented, 

E.  K.  Now  they  three  go  toward  the  Garden  of  Comfort :  they 
point  one  to  another,  and  feem  to  taike  one  v/ith  another.  They  go 
in  the  path  which  leadeth  from  him  ['Um'/]  toward  the  Park. 

' ■'  Uriel 7h4e  are  V/ife  men,  for  they  fliall  efcupe  the  dumber  nfthe  [a]  firft  a>,d  the  fecond,  A  He  mMn- 

mdjhitll  !ive  /ri-the[A]  third  in  comfort  and  plcafure  :     For  behold,   Thofe  Vfhich  have  ent^ed,  ^'^_^°  ,^'^^'^^' 
and  Hoyi>(}}£ II  enter,  have  defervi-d  their  reward.  whjchgathcr- 

But  fi>ne  there  be  that  enter,  and  nffeS  not  the  end  ;  and  fuch  fljall  they  he  as  he  is,  which  cd  flowcrs^ajid 
defileth  the  flowers.      "  ■  ot  the- third. 

E.  K.    Now  here  cometh  a  man  from  the  Park-ward,  and  meeteth    '^'"J""""- 
thofe  three  men, and  givcth  them  three  very  rich  garments  :    they  put 
off  their  former  garments  ,   and  put  on  thofe  rich  and  beautiful  gar- 
ments. 

Uriel Otherfome  therehe,  and  g^o  the  middle  way,  hecaufe  it  It  the  next  and  ftraightefl-,  i." 

and  thofe  be  fuch  as  enter  with  their  owh  oraamentSj  which  are  very  poor  and  bare,  and  upon  whofe 
garments  can  hang  no  pleafpre. 

•,    Some  there  are  that  enter  [i]  from  nie  (for  without  yne  none  entreth  into  that  Garden  )  and  j_ 

iecaufe  I  am  the  light  of  him  that  Ughteth  by  Creation,  therefore  is  there  a  way  perfed,  and  bear-  Note.  Caafa 
eth  teftimony  from  me,  whereby  they  are  thought  worthy,  and  ^-re  [2]  apparelled  for  that  place  fi^eqitt  ««:_ 
Ofpleafre,  and  fo  worthily  enter.       ,  ta7^''ll^i* 

Lo  they  enrich  themfelves,  being  made  rich  with  the  beauty   of  Co  pkafant  floicers :   and  they  ah  ^t^%luiit)iic, 
ipayes  dnnk^of  the  water  of  wifdom  to  their  comfort  and  continuance-      Bleffed  is  he. that  fo 
entreth:. 


/  Three  ntett 

\  Uriel,  from  \ 
]  this   Hill      \ 


Three  men 


'The  (jiirden 
of  Comfort 
^  \ViJ6orn, 


ell  wotthy  to  enter :   hut  onely  one  hath 
the  proper  Tejiimony,  &.c. 


to  enter  f^ithTedi- 
jnony. 


1 .  He  that  dcfileth  rhe  flowers,  was  worthy  to  enter  into  our  Gjrien-.  l,t  because  he  ca^e  not  A  <kfi  er  of  the 
.hither  t.rnyThvonc,andfotookthewaydefcendn,g  from  th-  Wl',  Q^ '«J^''«^  ^•7?'^^ ''^^;^*;  f^^^^i.j^^f 
.  Garden  of  WifdomU^  worldly  apparel  i  T.^ici,/.,*f«/«'^;"  as  a  mi'k  between  hm  and  true  ^^^^^-^^^^^^ 
\mfdom,  yet  he  think^eth  h\m£c\i  f^t\i(\cA.  ^  >.  ,      ,       ,     ,•    r  \c         f         j    -r^.J 

2.  He  whofe  coat  is  bare,  was  alfo  worthy  :     Bvt  hecaufe  he  tho'jiht  hmifelf  worthy,  andvifited 
y»ot  my  feat,  he  took  the  middle  way,  where  are  no  ornaments  ;     Therefore  he   brv":o^    in  his  o^ri 

zKedneJfe  which  is  fo  thredbare,  that  the  flowers  fall  off  it,  as  ftom  a  marble  jlone,  and  the  waters 
'ideth  of  it,  asfrotn  the  bacl^of  a  Falcon. 

Behold., I  fit:  happy  are  thjfe,  that  come  unto  me.  ,     ^  -, ,  ,      ,■      ■  ,  ^, 

Lo  you  fee,  you  may  become  wife  ;  with  the  [i]  Cloudy,  wife  withtht  [2]  bare  ;  and  wife  yfiith  thre.m«ner 
lefe  that  are  [3]  advanced  ;  and  dwell  in  trtte  wtjdom. 

The  Gate  that  thou  (halt  enter  into,  is  a  fire  of  fury,  and  of  revenge  :  ,     ,,  ^  ^  ""^^  '"^  ^^ 

But  be  it  unto   thee,  as   thy  Eleciion  is.     Even  from  the  beginnmg,  nakedly.       Open  ««to  vcnge. 

'  fffl  Kudolpa. 


A  true^elatictj  of  D^  Dee  his  Anions  mth/fints,  6:c. 


Rv.doly>li,  the  wanner  of  Gods  vifitation  .  ShefP  unto  him  the  holy  Vifion  -.for  I  vcill  nia]\e  thee  uu- 
Rh.i':/;;)  the  ^(,)j^^,a,^  hand,  an  ann,jf/?  an  half  body.  Ifen  I  will  bf  merciful  unto  hij)Ty  and  feal  hini  for 
*^'"rL°"L,  J.  mv  feif  ;  and  he  fhall  be  thy  comfort.  I  will  put  my  fear  /fife  him,  and  he  fhall  be  afraid  to 
P  ivy  Q^  all.      fin,  and  he  pall  hccov.e  a  rod  to  thoje  that  are }mul. 

RW  DOL-  Bappj  ayethofe,  -frhofen  ovks  are  a  hope;  «;?<iTy/x/e  faith  deferveth  the  aid  of  my  light.  This 
P  H.II  s  i  M-  is  of  God,  and  I  am  the  finger.  HaffJ  are  thofe  that  are  directed  by  »je.  For,  in  me  it  the  tru^- 
n^    r  rt:^.,  Pffh  aii-dW^htofd^redion. 

m^rtium.  E.  K.    Hc  IS  gOnC. 

A.  As  concerning  this  Gate(la/lly  fpoken  of^  whereintol  muft  enter,  thatit  is  a  fire  of 
fi.ry,  fir.d,  of  revenge:  O  Lord,  I  am  afraid,  if  tliat  phrafe  be  of  any  difpleafur>  to  nie  :  for  / 
■  rrferrtd  my  EteCiion  to  the  willofGody  m  was  for  his  honour  and  glorj  to  be  granted  .-  And  I  have 
longm.ide Petition  to  Qod  for  jo"r  helpymd  I  defire  nothing  that  Ihould  make  the  higheft  of, 
fended  with  me.  But  perhaps  the  fervicc  of  God  wherein  I  am  to  ferve  him  now,  (with 
his  Talent  of  vvifdom  to  be  imparted  to  me)  confifteth  in  the  exccntion  of  the  juflire  of  Go^,  1 
\yith  a  furious  and  revenging  fire,  as  under  ths  Altar  they  lie,  and  cry  foryr^o-. 
'  7hou  h-ijifaid  — — ■ 


Af^c.  cap.6. 

V-id 

His  voycc. 


A.   All  Laud,  Honor,  and  praife  be  unto  the  Almighty,  wife,  and  our  moft  niercifull  God : 
iU)iV, and  ever.     Amen. 


Sii^th. 


Tuefday,  21.  Augufli :  Ante  Meriiiem  horam  Circiter  9.  t  Praga^. 

Precibus  finiti?,  &:  invito  Vriele  ut  nos  illuminaret,  dirigrret>  confolaretur,  &e. 

E.  K.  Z)riel  is  here,  and  about  his  head  at  a  little  diftance,is  a  bright 
part  of  a  Circle  like  a  Rain-bow,  ^c. 

A,  We  propounded  unto  you  yefterday  (O  you  faithful!  mcfTager  of  the  higheft)    as  coii^ 
cerning  this  letter,  how  it  is  liked  :  when  it  is  to  be  fent,  ind  by  whom,  &c. 

Uriel O  earth-,  how  great  a  Monjier  art  thou,  and  hew  great  is  thj  wickedneffe,  which  makjli 

dull  mans  capacity,  and  carriefl  him  away  into  an  obfcure  and  rafh  fenfe  ?  Not  without  a.  caufe  ar%, 
thou  hated  with  the  higbejl ;  yea,  not  without  a  caufe  are  thy  Garments  made  port. 

0\ly  brethren,  how  long  will  you  be  grievous  to  the  Lord,  how  long  (I  fay}  will  you  be  without  un- 
dcrlianding. 

0,  how  long  will  you  confder  your  own  commodities,  and  neglect  the  harveji  of  the  Lord? 
[a.    I  iinderftand  nothing  of  the  occafiou  of  thefe  fpeeches.] 

CfricI But  behold,  for  you  have  chofen  unto  your  felves  a  vifitation  ,  and  have  Irokjn  the 

viftation  of  the  Lord, 

For  when  you  were   commanded  you  went  not  ,  and  v.nto  jour  fe'vts  you  chufe  dayes  for  ad- 
vantage :  Well,  1  fay.  Take  your  choice  and  become  wife  :  for  1  am   ready  to  deliver. 
y  fay,  prepare  your  felves,  and  he  ready  :  But  I  fear  me  ,  (yea,  I  kjiew  it)  that  you  will  become' 
fogpy  and  mifty.     Nolwithjiandmg  thut  faynh  the  Lord  :  Sinceyou  iicillhecomewife,Chzl\ifeyoni^ 
felf  for  a  few  daycs,  and  abftain,  and  you  fhall  fee  that  I  am  a  God  that  can  vifir,and  mightily:  * 
The  rromife    I  am  not  man,  that  my  promifes  may  not  be,  neither  fpeak^  I  of  any  thing  that  liveth  not,  for  I  am 
bccomcch  life,  light,  and  the  breath  of  underftanding.        Becaufe  you  have  followed  my  Commandments    ("yet' 
God  well  plea- ffjnie  of  you  obftinate]y,and  rather,  as  reprehenders  then  obedient  fervants)  /  will  put  afnaf-^ 
A  ntvr  ptomifc-^^   ^'^^°  Satan,  and  unto  hi)  Minijiers,  and  thou  fhalt  fit  in  judgement  againft  the  wicked  ;  For^ 


A  reproof  of 
our  choice' 
Dudc. 


Prepare. 


I 


to  A. 


NOT  Y  E  r 
Stewards 
Ovcrfeei? 
L'ibourers. 
ThcLo.d  his 
vlfiratJon  is 
not  yc:. 


I  will  multiply  thee,  and  thy  hovpold  :  And  of  thj  feed  ;  yea,  even  of  thy  feed. 
Will  I  finder  out  a  Camber,  ^  <:»«;  will  root  out  a  people,  which  1  have 
long  favoured.  And  for  this  caufe  fpared  -^  I  him  unto  thee,  for  a«fo  him 
that  loveth  me,will  I  be  a  jufi  rewaraer.  Ihe  branches  of  the  wicked  do  I  cut 
off,  and  viahj  worfe  then  the  Affes  dung  :  Jjiit  unto  the  faithfull  will  J  fend 
honour,  and  a  Crown  ofrejoycing. 

Hui,  who  is  he,  that  I  cannot  reward  him  ?  Or  where  dwelleji  thou  ,  (in 
Heaven,  or  in  Earth)  that  art,  andrejoyceji  not  by  me  ?  If  thou  follow  my 
Commandments,  and  I  once  begin  to  love  thee? 

I  have  told  thee  that  I  will  place  thee  here. 
£a.  In  this  Citie.] 

Uriel Not  as  a  Citizen  ,  hut  at  an  owner  of  ma- 

vyhoufes.    But  take  heed,  thou  be  be  jv.'l  to  me,  and  do 
what  I  command  thee. 

A.  Lord  thou  knoweft  my  heart,  help,  and  fupply  my  wants. 

Uriel Behold,  the  Corn  is  not  ripe,  neither  are  the  Grapes  red ,  nor  the  Sun  bath  not  yet  fea^- 

foned  them  ;  Therefore,  yet,  need  1  not  Stewards,  but  Overfeers  :  And  as  yet.  Laborers  are  tome 
as  fliadovvs.  Becaufe,  not  yet,  no,  not  yet  is  the  time  of  my  viftation:  therefore  he  that  bring-^ 
eth  his  Syck/e  now ,  ma'.i  not  reap  for  we,  but  7i!uli  rejoyce  in  himfelf.  Happy  is  he  that  tarrieta 
the  Lord,  ieall  afterward  the  doors  be  ilmt,  and  the  fealt  at  an  end.       AHvifdom  {andfcien* 


A.  I  muft  be 
placed  here  in 

frage. 


a  Camber,  vide 
Anno  Ij8i.    \%.Martii.i 

»  A.  Fane  iAldti^ib 
RoUndiim  infintem  menm 
uii  vitam  rtfiimit  Dens 
(miraCulo<e  qaafi)  Crth 
covia,An.-i^S^.J»l:i  14. 
Sed  Dens  114  nop  quod 
h^c  mi'iii  tarn  mtrum  li- 
detuT  qtiam  virum  MtfiJl 
fregnantem  cetiferi,  fyc. 
VideSepu^i.  jyfifericor' 
diaiH  Dei  fJ  imijfam. 


JtrueRelitkh  of  D^  Dee  his  Jclisni  witbfpirits,  ike,       tl^ 


line. 

to 


res  comprehended  hi  wifdomj  ^"-^  Tfork.eth  forJ:}mfe/f ,  U  of  the  vorld ;  But  the  vifdoni  that  I givr, 
I  rrlve  Openly')  ,rnd  hitho>'t  reproJCh  :   that  I  aifo  rt']oyci>ig  in  tkewifdom  may  be  gl  rifled^  and  ex- 
acted with  a  TH  a  'erne  of  ho/f-rir.    JVbcn  Sodom  cried  for  ve^tgeaMCfy  had  I  it  net  ready?   Could 
nat  I  jrom   he:n<nt   h.ive  co>:fin»ed  them  viih   the  breath  of  r,ty  own  titouth  ?  /,    in  my  fe/f  kjiow 
tt^and  am  witneffe  :  But  lo,  in  the  f  ride  of  their  filihineffe  I  had  regard  to  time:  And  (that  it  might 
he  known  to  all  Nations)  lice><fed  my  Anj^els,  und  %ave  them  power  .  Ayid  lo^  then  made  a.  promife  A.  Promifc 
untt  all  Nations  tJun  they  fl^onld  he  blefftd  in  Abrahain:fr.f«  the  fame  moneth  that  I  deiiroyed  the  So-  A''\,ham. 
domicfs.         Jbefe  things  did  I,  as  iinta  Nos  :  and  imt->  Seth,  whom  I  Ived  :  \  made  tiicni  privy  .<^'*.  the  third 
of  time  ts  come^  and  iptnedmto  them  my] mlgements  :  hecaufe  the  w,rldJhould  be  jujlly  condemned.       °^'''<^'""- 
After  '.he  favie  m.nmer  made  I  a  p.-omifc  imco  you  :  L",  after  the  fame  manner  have  I  called  yon  A  piomife 
.to  coi:nfeL        But  you  have  cliol'en  the  loweft,  and  have  ixfufed  the  higheft  places ,   and  have  mide  '.mte) 
regarded  your  own  comforts,and  not  my  viiltation.  I  command  d  thee  /tot  to  go  into  the  woods-^"\    ,   . 
and  to  fetter  fFolves :  neither  to  f.tw  the  lygers  teeth.     I  delivered  you  not  unto  the  wich^edy  neither  miniked'" 
fnff:rcd  I  them  to  rejoyce  over  yjnt  But  I  liave  brought  you  from  deatli,  and  fiom  tlie  dayes  of  ri-.e'mocies 
lamentation,  andhave  dealt  withyoti  of  faithfull brethren  do  in  their  divifions  :  Not  that  I  forget  ofcjodui-oa 


f„y  felf  ^  but  that  I  would  be  m'lgnified.,  and  that  yon  might  fee yovr  wildnrjfe,and  nah^ed  rafijnejfe :  "*• 

M'»''  'Iff  there  upon  the  earthy  which  would  have  burji  with  gladn(Jfe,  and  have  rent  their  Garments 

in  pieces.      If  I h^d  touciied  them  witli  the  leall  of  thefe  Counfels  ( fo  I  call  thentj  becaufe  they  r^  ro^.^xge.! 

are  my  ftcrets")     Is  it  not  fafficient  that  I  have  brought yoh\_\.'jhii[\cc  fafe  i'.Have  promifed  you    a  liK-elidp 

afurehelp?  piomikd. 

Lo,  yon  wrajl  me,  for  what  it  he  of  the  [*^.  This  is  fpokcn  In  refpeft  of  God  his 

world,  to  whom  I  pall  c:.nfirm  letters  ?  judgement  required  of  the  letter.] 

They  orieve  me^  beca'fe^they  are  the  doings  of  man  :  0  man^  let  man  anfwer  unto  thee,    and  let  it 
tufice  thee,  that  the  mark^  whereat  thou  fhooteji  ;>  in  my  hand. 

t.My  Wjrk,  it  not  a  work^ oj  hours  nor  dayes.       But  when  I  command^  do  fpeedily .    .    ^'^(?k  the  Do  the  Lords 
Thunders  fall  from  Heaven  ,  and  burn  up  the  Earth  ,  fcale  her  face^  and  leave  her  nailed.     Then,  Command- 
Xfcw,  TV/// you  believe.  '  ment  fv^ecdily. 

Behold,  lie  th.it  ii  a  man,  heingnew  born,  is  accounted  a.  Mon'hr.  I^ok,  ''f^J^^^-  i 

Is  it  not  written  ?  Lo,the  Lord  looked  from  heaven  in  hiivifitation ,  and  in  the  midday,  and  a'    ,      "V- 
■groatred upon  her,  for  lie  had  vexed  him.        Htpfy  is  he  that  ii  ready  whenbe  v/fiteth  :  That  which  ^ 
I  command,  lee  it  be  done.        For  when  the  Kings  of  the  earth,  fay,  do  this  :  They  play  not  alfo  the 
)f4rt5  of  their  fervants  and  fuljeds ,  but  lo,.  it  is  done.    Suffer  me   (I  pray  you')  to  have  that  fa~ 
I  vour. 

A.  DcoNoftro  Mifericordi,  Pio,  &  Jufto;  fit  omnis  HonotjLaus  Zc  Gloria.     Anen. 


Tut[ddy ,  21  Af<gu(li.  t  Pragse. 

After  Dinner  as  we  [E.  K.  and  ^.]  were  in  my  Study,  and  conferring  of  my  choife ,  and 
very  for ry  t/j^twehad  nvadeour  cijoiienot  of  the  beft;  E.K.  faw  I^r/f/In  the  ftone,  which  yec 
fiood  unput  up  :  and  faid,  he  had  feen  him  there  ever  lince  we  began  :  So  conii>:g  to  the  jione  he 
fnid  as  fellowcth. 

Uriel ftUrmurnot  among<i  ynur  felves:  But  rejoyce  and  be  glad, and  found  into  the  greatneffe 


« 


f  Gods  mercies,  which  bear eth  all  your  veukneffe,and  leadeth you  through  the  fogiy  end  perikys 
mijis  of  your  daily  temptations  even  by  the  hand  :  And  now,  not  onel'y  giveth,lut  alfo  exhorteth^ 
1  fpeak^with yot  as  a  man.  Yea,  let  we  fpeaj^^with yon  as  a  man  :  You  zrc  o^\^reA  viiih  Cm  ^  and 
with  the  world,  and  are  not  yec  ape  for  the  vilitation  of  God,  Norrour  urt- 

My  brethren^  God  hath  dealt  mercifully  with  A.   In  malevolam  animam  non  introibic  to  be  vi  '^ted, 

you,hath  opened  unto  JOH  thefe  three  wayes  de-  fapientia  ,   nee  habitabit  in  corporeBcckfiauesi 

ftrtus  fubdico  peccacis,hcclefiaftes,  cap.i.    "p;  i. 

[E.  K.  He  fpeaketh  other  language,  I   under/land  not.J 

Tt<rt  oneof  you  might  have  cntredinto  thehigheft  Gate. 

A'td  why  ?     B'caufe  the  workman  might  be  able ,  and  correfpon-  m^l\i^ltTTo^i^  '^'^  """'^ 

dent  unto  the  work,  and  time  ('of  the  Lord)  to  come.  God  hath  ""jo  ^  '^"wxThiT'^'in  fac  fu- 

done  may  great  things  for  you  :  but  you  will  not  fee  them.  Tar-  p,^     Xo  E.K   in  viJe  To  A.L. 

ry  av^hile  till  I  come  again.  -luvive. 

E.  K.  He  iigonc  beyond  a  thing  like  a  Hill. 

A.   After  half  aquarter  of  an  hour  he  came  again. 

E.  K.  He  hath  a  pair  of  Tables  in  his  hand,  made  as  of  white  bone : 
md  therein  arc  many  i  ames  written  orJerly,  one  under  another. 
-£.  K.  If  I  thought  this  to  be  of  God,  and  this  to  be  Vriel  indeed,  it 
verc  anothermatter  :  but  their  too  much  familiarity  maketh  me  doubt. 

A,  The  old  faying  is  true  in  you, i\?/«i;i/j»ji//tfr;frfj/)^rit  conteniptunu 

[ff    2]  Uriel iBe= 


214       ^  true^elation  of  I>,  Dee  his  AUions  mihffirits,  6cc. 


Ikiel.  r.....  Believe  me,  by  Heaven  and  Earth,  I  ain  true  Uriel. 

E.  K.  He  hath  another  Book  holdcn  unto  him,  by  one  ftandulg^^ 
him,  who  is  like  a  fliadow. 

A  ne*  choicf,       Uriel Give  ear,  fay  and  chnfe  :  for  after  this  time,  there  is  nochoice. 

by  GoJ   hii         Dee,  thy  age  and  continuance  in  thii  world,  in  flejhi  according  to  the  finger,    and  fecond/rp- 
prjit  mercy    partion,ifhicbyou  call  Nttturcy  is7.\jeiirs  and  it  half :  ^and  her?  't  if  L^-  po^riting  to  the  otfatr 

I)'rhis  :g.-.         E.  K.  He  that  is  like  a  Oiadow  openeth  the  Book  •,    it  feeming  to  Be 
of  yern  or  fteel.     In  which  Book  appeareth  divers  names,  as  Bamafan^ , 
Corfax-)  Tobomaphala-^  ^c, 

[  A.  Tliey  recmeJ  cobs  the  names  of  good  Angels  proper  to  peculiar  men.  ] 

Uriel.......  T\\oy\\  E.K.']doii  more  than  thou  art  Commanded.     Tet^ccale  awhile.  } 

.  -  t  ^.  Be'caufe  he  [  E.K.  ]  read  thefe  names. 

E.  K.    He  ipreadeth  athing  like  a  Cloud  before  them.  „,  ^ny,- 

E.  K.  Now  he  appeareth  again,  and  the  other  with  him.  "^^ 

Avidat  bMis,      E.  K.   Sudfaijina  appeareth  in  the  Book,  and  againft  it  ^6, 

Uriel. ......  So  muchfhalt  thou  [  E.  iC.  ]  live  by  nature,  and  die  violently.  ''a 

E.K.  Now  he  is  covered  again. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  here  again.  -q 

E.  K.  ^^^//'cw  ftandeth  written  in  that  Book,  and  73  with  a  prick 
over  the  upper  part  of  the  figure  3. 

E.  K.  The  Book  is  vrry  big  and  full  of  names,  and  numbers  againft 
them:  the  leaves  are  very  thin. 
Ajiafhtn  rr.y        p^  j^    Now  l/'W  J openeth  his  book  himfelfj  And  there  appeareth 

pooj  angel.  t  •      n    r\      ir  UO 

Sidfamn. R.K.  againft  Jflafbcn,  122.    And  againlt  Sudjamna  appeareth  87. 

h^sgood  An-  ^liel. Beyond  the  which^you  cannct  :  — -  Kttwitkjianding  this  lifr^is  alwajes  given  bj 

vlt'u  Kami,    Gody  or  at  the  intercedion  of  fome  one,  or  mo,  of  us  bis  Angels.      The  other  it  itatur^i! :  not' 
e.ati^t.       '    withitanding  isjhortened  through  the  fin  of  man.     I  ara  a  vitnefs  to  mjfe/fi  that  thefe  books  aad 
words  are  true.  '  | 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  in  his  Cloud  again. 

A.   After  a  while,  they  appeared  again,  as  before.  ;; 

E.  K.  They  look  very  gravely  on  their  books. 

Uriel Behold  my  brethren,  God  if  ready  to  open  hu  merciful  ftore-houfes  and  gates  eftiH' 

derftanding  unto  you  :      But  he  that  liveth  for  himfelf,    and  for  the  end  ef  thit  fhadow  ,   limitttk 

A.  ^s   Kinj;   his  wifdoni  with  thi<i  number  :    and  fhall  loth  have  an  end  at  once  :      But  he  that  turneth  himtd 

txekja^  did     the  wall,  and  weepeth  bitterly,  fliall  enter  into  this  Booh^  :    But  he  mujl  not  build  his  own  houfey 

RegnuntA.tap.  ^^j  ^^^  houfe  for  the  Lord  ;   Neither  mujl  he  be  vifited  by  the   challenge  of  proniife,  hut  bj/  the 

'°   M  .        nieermercy  and  good  will  of  God,  and  at  his  pleafure  and  appointment  :    He  that  hath  under- 

Jlanding  let  him  hear.  ' 

Behold,  This  his  pen,  it  a  pen  of  Steel ;  But  that  that  I  raze  withal,  is  of  Gold,  and  x  piercing  In- 

* /fxgnftiii.   firunient.     If  therefore  your  vifitation  Jhall  be   after  to  ^  tnorrow,  and  that  you  Covet  to  buiU> 

O  r  new  or  re-  (  becaufeyou  are  men  )  Then  give  your  names  unto  the  yern :    But  if  you  will  retnember  the  Lord, 

io^mei  choke,  and  adde  any  thing  unto  his  building,  faithfully.    Then  vow  your  names  umo  me.  In  the  name 

of  hini  which  created  you.    After  this  time,  there  ts  no  choice.  '"3 

j4  g  est  mercy,      Therefore,  confider  ;    for,  never  before,  (  but  once  )  was  this  my  fiery,  and  mercy  of  God  opined 


ana  myllcry.    mtotftan. 


E.  K.  Now  he  hath  drawn  the  Cloud  to  him. 


~  n.'n'  ■ 


A.  I  am  notable  (  O  Lord  )  to  give  thee  condigne  thanks  for  thefe  mercies  :  But  thy 
will  be  done  :  Not  as  we  will,  nor  as  we  have  rafhly  and  blindly  (  before  )  chofen  :  But  this 
is  our  choice,to  be  thy  fervants  all  the  dayes  of  our  life  ;  and  we  delire  not  long  life  fo  much, 
as  th&  favour  which  addeth  thofe  dayes,  wherein  our  faith  may  be  fruitful  through  thy  gra- 
ces abounding  in  us,  1  renounce  my  former  choice^  I  challenge  no  promife :  But  require  thee,  O 
Ood,of  thy  fatherly  goodnefle  to  be  my  light,  direftor,  ftatf,  ftrength,  defence,  and  comfort. 

The  former     now  and  ever.     Amen. 

cha.ce  renoun-       y^.j^j Alwayes  call  untome  for  the  T'eftimony  and  witneffe  of  tht  p-omife  of  God,  and 

This  Day.        the  remembrance  of  this  day. 

v-     I  E.K.  He 


A  true  ^eUtioti  of  D'.  Dee  his  JBions  With  fpirits,  6c c,        z  2  <^ 
E.  K.  He  hath  wrlrtcn  after  the  *  numb-rs  in   his  own  B jok, .  ^^^ , 

A.   A<i  laudcm,  gloriam,  &  honorem  Der,  Efto,  Ef!o.     /^;>/f«. 

Uriel Now/lf<i!  with  Kodolph.  and  be  noc  flack:  ftr  until  thoii  have  talked  ^it*  ,^,  . 

him,  I  appear  no  won:  *'f-'-  «<«  wt'i  ik^   .  ,v  i  ,,,-.}:■ .  r.oacipm. 

Tdy  hafte,  fliall  prevent  theflander  of  wk\ei  tongues.,  wh.m  Satan  bath  alreadj Jiirred up 
agaiUji  thee. 

A.   1  iiiiderlland  of  none. 

Uriel. It  u  beji  thm  UHderjland  it  not  at  all. 

E.  K.  He  piittcrh  a  Cloud  over  all  the  Stone,  like  a  white  wrinkled 
Curta'n.;  and  fo difappeareth. 

A.   Bit  thoui^h'you  appear  not,  yet  of  ^^t/iwi  I  may  require  anfvrer,  to  know   when  mj 
wife  and  children  are  to  be  fent  for,  &c. 

E.  K.   There  is  no  a.  fwer  given. 

A.  Fiat  voluntas  Dei,  juxra  illius  beneplacitum  :  cui  omnis  laus  gloria  &  gratiarum  A&io, 
nunc  &  in  omne  sYum.    A'uen. 

A.  f  received  letters  from  my  wife,  that  (he  and  her  children  arc  well.      God  have  the 
praife  and  thanks  therefore.     Amen. 


-J-  Friday i  Auguliiy  2^.  iMeridif.        Pragx. 

Being  willed  to  deal  with  Rodolphusy  firft  by  letter,  and  then  by  fpecch  :     I  thought  good 

to  fend  the  Letter  before  written,  for    the  Emperour  ;   by   the  Noble    Dew  vi  helnio  de  St, 

CleW''fne,t\\t)L\ngoi  Sp.iin)\\^Pi-£-e[lns  Negotioriiynvi\z\\  tlii^  Emprrciir;   and  theraipon  by 

"E^tiericiis  Sunttag,  the  Lord  Lisk^ie  his  Secretary,!  wrote  this  to  the  aiorefaid  Ijou  CUmence, 

!  ^tnd/f»t  it  this  Bartholomew  Day, 

EA  eft  honiinum  in  terris  conditio  (Nobilifsimevir)  lit  fibi  foli  nullusnatus  efTe  videatnr: 
Iir  mo  ntqiie  libi  iillus  omnia  fponte  nafcetuia,  vel  ulcroab  aliisoblaca,  qiis  iiti  maxime 
funt  iieceflaria  recipiat.      Mutu  p  tnde  hominuui  emerlerunc  fociecates,  niucue  amiciti.*", 
mutuxoperjE,  Mu  uadona,  Reriim  commutario,  be  empcirnis,  rerumque  vendicionis   concra- 
&US  :    Aiiiquediverli  hominiim  exiihnit  ftacusjunde  hominnm  inter  homines,   &.cumhomi- 
nibiis  miiltiplicia  procurantur  officia,  commerciaque.     N  rque  omnium  iitoriini,  (ola  eft  iitilitas 
•^ei  (que  peribit)  voluptas,  fcojius  ille,  vel  riiii>,  quern  aciingere  conantiir  ta.  ftudent  :    Sed 
■-aliudaliquibus  eft  piopj.irum    quod  Divin.usquidem  eft,  quod  vtrturem  vel  Honcftatem  no- 
minare  poffumis ;  qui  c  iliius  demi:ia,  hominum  intoinjct  mentes  &(.  orner,  iibiqiie  coapcet  : 
Ade  1  ut  fcdibus  illas  reddac  c^jleftibus  difjnas.       l!!u  J,  illud,   erco  eft  IlluftrilVime  vir  quod 
cxcellenciam  veftram  cam  mihi  pridie  reddid  t  atrencam,  beiiignam  Sc  peihunidiiam  ;     Illud  eft 
quod  veftram  refricabit  memoriara,  8c  ve/lrum  inlignicer  acuet  ingeniiim,  in  (  aufa  mea,  fujs 
CaefarcT^  Majefti  cam  proponeiida,   quam    commciiJaiida  :  eoqric   traftanda   modo,  quo  ilia 
traftari  Arcana  debeanc,  que  a.pnicis  crcdantur  ,   Sc  a  piucioribu-;  inceliigaiicur  :  veriftima 
licet  lint,  8c  ex  fefe  utili.fima.     Qjpciriu-;  G  efjrea  fua  .\lajell4>,  rairiib'r:;m  hanc  8c   maxi- 
niam  r)ei,nonProvidcnciani  foium  fed  bonicacem  etiam  aniplexus  fucrit.,eo  cicius  &  abuiidan- 
tiiis,  me*' ad  ilhmi  legationis   conlUbit   lincericas,  bonicas  8i  utiliras.      Voluiiiem  cquiddm 
huiic  inclufum  iibellum,  lirer  rqu^iaclufis  veftr<e  exccllenli^,  ipfc-met  acrulifl~e.     Sed  (cum 
venia  lit  diftum  )  ex  di^iti  pedis  mei  otfiufa  cuticula,  nun  ram  cominr)  J    pDlfum  hodic  pedes 
venire.     Pr&inde  amico  meo  hoc  onus  impofui,   ur  (  cum  veilr  r  ExccUeiuijt  manuumdcolcu- 
latione  )  omnia  mea  vobis  oiferac  ferVitia  :  hocqu«,  quicquid  cH,  pro  fua  Ca;larea  Mjjellatc^ 
traderet  muaufculi. 


Frag£  24.  A'tgufii  i^^. 


-E ;  "The  Superfcription  of  this  Letter  was  thus,  Joannes  Dec. 

IlluftrifTimo  Domino,  Domino  Don  Gulielmodc  Sanfto 
Cicmente  fcrenilTImi  atque  Catholici  Hifpaniarum  Re- 
iStns,         gis  Ne^otiorum  apud  facram  C«faream  Majelidccmj  &C' 
Prxfeao;,Domino  meo  ObfervandirEmo.    ^^*  '^'t  ^«« ' 

f^"    »A-i  Monday 


^1^6     jltrue^eUtmi ofD^,  Dee hh  JBions  itith /pints, 6cci 


•  ■  ■••\ 

Monday^  Ai/gniti  27.  Aiajie circa  <^.        t  Pra^x. 

•    freriliii  finitis^  I  propounded  to  God,  of  Maitmi  four  things. 
Fiiit,  what  was  the  caufe  of  the  erioiir  recorded,  Felr.  18.  this\4««!>  1584.    at  Laikfi  c/E 

Secondly,  In  what  fcnle  is  thts  to  be  un  'erftood,  which  M-^dimi  willed  me  to  fay  to  Rodol-      ^ 
pfk'.f-,  An  Affl.fl  of  the  Lord  htth  appeared  unto  me  ? 

Thirdly,  Midrmi  fai  J  as  concerning  die  time  of  my  wif<;  and  children  and  houfbold  to  be 
moved  h'thcr,  L?t  th,it  be  my  ■;h'arg^e  to  a>tf»er  thee  / 

Fourtiily,  M.idr,ni  willed  nie  to  write  to  Rodulphiu:  And  I  have  done,  and  caufed  it  to  be 
dtW'^cicA  (oDm  n^ilhel'tio de  Saniio  CUtnettte,  the  Spauifh  Ena'o4;radour,  to  deliver  it  to  thtf 
Ediperour.     God  profper  it.     Amen. 

E.  K.  Hercfheis. 

t.  The  eternal  roots  of  verity  bring  forth  fruit,  to  the  comfort   of  fuch  as  delight  in  th« 
pure  vciicy  (or  the  fervice  of  God,  &:.     And  you  Madimiy  as  a  Mini/ler  of  the  Higheft  in^yc- 
.  f.  rity,  are  unto  me  welcome. 

jvfajtne  q  a     ^^^^   ^  Even  as  mms  fingers  [  or  a  thing,]  touching  ,  moving,  or  forcing  ah  irtjiruvtent 

Note    tliTs    '  ni'^fJCal^is  lb.'Cj.uf:',  without  the  which  it  cannot [Mni-,  or  dvWi.  up  the  air  ;  -which  again  feek^ 
ph  .ife  of       ingiffnet  and  feeling  a  {lay,  is  the  [^objedum~\  caufe  of  concord  or  di]f,Mancjj  according  fe  die  in- 
found,  ward  fpi*'it  and  iw-tgination  of  the  thin<z.  that  nioveth,  or  of  the  finger  moving  :  So  the  earthly  part 
of  r,taft,Khi-h  hath  fto  motion  of  it  felf,  (^radicaHy")  tnoveth  by  touch  or  finger  (^whatfocve^')    fpiri- 
t'la',  iwd  feyideth  ''lit  fomids  •-,  not  according  to  her  felf^biit  according  to  the  fiery  ^ yea  invifibUy  »nA 
fp/ritual  psJTP."'-',  v;herevrithal  it  is  moved,  - 
Three  movers      Hereby  tfe Uirny  that  manshjdyy  and  hit  organical  motions^hdththree  manner  of  movers  ;  cen- 
'"  '^'"  '^°^    zr^Vuci;  iy  th? property  an-l  perfeclian  of  toe  S July  .iCw^er'iovc,  and  by  defccnfion  y  frovi  the  An-* 
cu.nng,          gels  or  participants  of  underjianding  :  E  contrario,  and  afcending,  jjpirifi  wickjdy  and  tempterst 
Q  SpUnd  r  in  ill  moving 

dKobiittutit  I.-  'B'.t  here  ym  ntiijl  Kotey  That  asthe  Sun  depriveth  the  Moon  in  refpecl  of  her  end,  which  is  t4 
meBlunttt^am  ^l^,g  ligljl^  liit  fjot  of  her  felf  ■■,  So  do  the  Angels  and  higher  powers  drown  and  overpadow  the- 
fuprM  b  r,x,ii-  J^^i  j^^  maiwhen  they  are  pre fent  :  wor}{ing  from  God  and  in  tkemfeheSy  {  asfroniabov^  )  andnot 

Note  the  mm-  h'^^f^'^  "  *^/  *'''"'»    "''  '^'''^  '^'^"/^  "^  ^^^  motion. 

fierof  thsDn-      Bit  when  the 'Devil  entret'-,  f.-ti  afcendeth,  he  wor\eth  not   hj  force  ,  but  by  enticement,  and  ft 

bilknl  wj  k    aliureth  the  foul,  to  grant  of  iiis  poiTeilion  :    whereby  he  entreth  and  becometh  jtrong. 

ing  in^  or  by        Thofe  that  have  ears  let  them  hear  i    for  my  w^rds  are  wifdom,  and  the   grounds  of  mimj 

"'■"'•  Scien:es. 

y.unius  Hurajnun  dr^us  ,  &c.  Then,  by  afimilitude,  is  the  world  wax  :   Mans  body  wax  :    aUX 

tMiuamCera.  tk' natural  motions  of  things,  natura/Iy  extended,   wtix  alfo  :  B>it 

{<uf trior,  our  purpoCe  is  of  rttan  ;  which  zt  ot\e  injiant  receivethtbree impftf^ 

"^fc^or"  ^'0"'  •   M>five,  Natural,  and  Offenfive. 
Pray  ao^inft  Temptation.  Whereby  you   Way  perceive,    1  hat  man  greatly  weedeth  to  pray   , 

T-rprrfJij  prtdomitiar.s  eft  cmfiJe-  again}  temptation  :   For  the  laft  Seal,  is  lign  of  him  that  owet'R' 

rarJs.  the  wax,  Hapfy  are  thofe,  that  can  watch  and  pray:  for  fuch  they 

A.  Pi'  qu^  h,-n^  vreca,  per  4-  ^^^  ^/^^^    ^^^^    ^^^  ^„^  ^^   /«rfrf/?  ,  to  the  wicked  afccn-'' 

J^tB  ex    hferual,  (i4tu,Jimi-er  af-        ^^'^-  rr         u    l  e.  ■  r-L^n  i   . 

andiitdi  tinrar.  1  an'wer  you :   If  you  be  but  as  a  ftrmg ,  Cbmenge  but  yottr  own 

duty  :  B'it  takf  heed, yon  be  vntuni-  *^ 

E.  K.  She  fpeaketh,  but  I  cannot  exprciTe  it.  i] 

A.  I  pray  you  let  nothing  of  your  words,  that  you  utter  to  us,  or  before  us,  be  unrecor'-' 

ded.  .  y" 

Mad I0H  are  not  worthy  to  write  it :  for  it  if  the  harmony  of  the  heavens.  ^.  .. 

St^y  a  while  ;  for  I  World  open  that  unto  yon,  which  I  perseive  I  may  not :   hnt  I  come  again. 
\_t..  We  read  over  the  premifes,  and  weighed  them  as    inftruftions  of  the  three  divcrS" 
movers  of  mans  fenfes  internally,  &c.     And  fo  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour 

E.  K.  Here  file  isaeain.  .^ 

r     ■ 

Mad. For  hethat  pur'fitth  hif  houfe,  and  flraweth  ruJheSy  and  beautifieth  the -chambers 

with  Garlands,  is  worthy  to  receive  (  becaufe  of  his  aptneffe,  )  fuch  as  are  meifagers  of  uiider--3 
ftanding and  light  My  friends  and  brethren,  marvellous  is  the  God  of  U  ifdom  inallkndur.^A 
and  W!,rk^s,  and  full  of  v  iriety  are  th'  workj  of  his  hands. 

E.  K.  Now  flie  fpeaketh  again  i  I  undcrftand  it  not. 

^'"k^"c"i>'  ^'"^  ^^  ^^'^  ^''/w^r  •    The  end  of  my  purpofc,  Satan,   perceiving  you  [^  E.K,  ]  as  well  to  be 

Ij,'.^  moved  ly  him  becaife  of  your  own  grunt  y  as  ly  the  motion  K*'kcri.withal  yAi  ifere  moved  and  i!lu- 

7iiinated : 


<^ true  %clat'ton  ofJD^, D^e  his  ABions  with  fpints,^c  22] 


tninated  :  andharg  the  father  of  futt/ety,  ayida.  frowiiri  nnderjiandhig  pur-  Smn  ab  n    h' 

p.fed, even  \nth\s one  fentence  •,j!ea,  with  thii  one  \ye,  to  everturn,    or   at     timcwasvcrybafic  wicli 
lettfi  to  h/ewiflj  the  woirh'mefft  of  our  meffage,  and  of  your  Yeceiviag  :  he-     e.K.  and  declared  his 
ctiiifeh&faw  the  coiirfe  of    nature^  and  th^  doings  of  ynan^  and  thattWismin     name    to   be  Satan  ac 
Mr.  Simon  Hagck,yoing  f/<?^^f/;,,  would  firji  vift  thee  ,[^i\']  therefore  he     i-^k:* 
thrnft  \na  fhingle  of  his  own  cutting  and  nature  :  Not  to  the  iment  it  fhould 
hecreditedybitt  to  the  intent,  it  Jhoiild  le  ajiumbliugl/kck^to  the  aclion  inttme     j,p  "^  *"''^"''*^  ^^  ^ 
to  conte,  which  is  now. 

lMj  brethreVyhe  is  a  marvellous  workr  ^"^  •'  "^4  one  that  Jtri\eth  row  the  nioii  jhingSyin  a  man- 
ntr,all.     'Buthchathhiirerv>rrd:Tl:>eref,redoIde}tyittol>efp!ikenhynie,orofme.         ^ 

A.   So  by  God  liis  Graccj  1  did  conceive,  and  undoubtedly  think,  and  of  many  other  things ^ 
lefid'S  that,  I  have  occalioii  of  reformiag  the  Records:  that  the  heavens  may  agree,  as  the    Reformati- 
phrafe  was  ufed.  ^t'^'  ^" 

l/l,id Many  there  are  not :  But  fuch  as  are,  gather  them  together,  let  me  fife  them, 

A.  I  thank  God  for  thac  his  mercy. 

A.  Now  I  befeechyoii  to  the  fecond  my  prefent  reqiieft  before  propounded,  it  may  pleafe 
jou  to  give  anfwer. 

Mad. When  the  Khtg  fendeth  a  Prefent  to  a  Noble  r)tau,er  vnto  any  one  that  he  favourethj  Anrwcr  to  the 

be  lovetby  or  delighteth  in  :  Ihe  Mejfager  carrieth  it 3  delivereth  it  within  his  houfe.  f':<j«n<l '«  »  ^*- 

£.  K.   She  fcemeth  to  fmile. 

He  to  whom  it  is  fent  enioyeth  it  3  he  iifeth  it ;  yea  ,  feradventure  (being  a  dainty  difli) 

fgtethofit. 

■■  Afterward  the  King  fendeth  to  hi>»  bjf  the  fame  nteffageryfalutetb  his  honjholdy  and  c^mmandeth 
him  to  fay  :  Jhnf  fayeth  the  King ;  Go  te  fuch  a  man  and  falute  him  :  lell  hint  that  I  will  vifit  him, 
and  that  If  ay  fo. 

Behold,  he  fitteth  fiill,  and  geth  mt^  neither  dothhe  the  Commandment  of  his  Superionr.  Tor  loy 
fayeth  he :  The  King  commanded  me  not  -,  his'mefTager  came,  and  would  fo.  Bat  whether  the 
Ring  Will  fo,  or  no,  I  kr,ow  not. 

Butheareji  thou  :  Thou  wicked  man,  hafi  thou  not  eaten  of  his  meat,  and  enjoyed  the  benefit  of   f^  Myftery." 
bii  prefent  before  ?  T«,  A  threefold  benefit,  which  fliall  continue  uncill  the  *  feventh  Angel, »K;rf(r8.9.io,di' 
and  untill  the  third  woe.  Ji-  capita  Aft' 

•  Man  iegettetb  a  Son,  and  lo,  his  wife  is  with  Childe,  andfhe  l^okfth  for  the  time  of  her  delive-  ('*bfi'^''- 
rance :  If  the  (jue'iion  be  moved  unto  him,  (his  wife  not  yet  delivered,)  whether  he  have  iff ne  ^  or, 
'fruit  of  his  body,  fay  thoH  vnto  me,what  Jhall  he  anfwer? 

A.    As  it  flvall  pleafe  God. 

•  Mad "that  is  no  anfwer, 

A.    Then  he  may  fay.  He  is,  in  hope  to  have  the  ilTue  his  wife  goeth  great  withall  ,  vnay  this 

feeni  an  anfwer,  I  befeech  you  ? 

Mad Jhciigh  the  Childe  be  not  yet  horn,  he  hath  ifftie,    Velivemnce,  is,  by  reafon  of  the  iffue, 

ijmd  not  called  iff'^e  of  the  deliverance :  for  he  is  a  fou  Of  well  unborn  M  born.  AM 

So  is  it  of  you  :  Thou  haft  prayed  unto  God,  and  he  hath  heard  thee.  ^i^'^^  God'^for" 

And  loythe  iiruc,  wiiich  he  giveth  thee  is  \Vifdom.    But  lo,  the  Mother  of  it  is  not  yet  deli' y,\{^oa^ 
\iifred.  Wirdoni, 

[    Fory If  woman  kjiow her  times  and  feafons of  deliverance  :  Much  more  doth he^         DEVS   Mater 
iWiich  is  the  Moiher  of  all  things.  But  thou  mayejlreioyxe  that  then  is  a  time  of    rerum  ommiim,idim 
deliverance,  and  that  thy  gift  is  compared  to  a  woman  with  childe.  fy  Pater. 

.For^  as  the  one  is,andfljall  be  Tiftlle  :  fo  is  wifdom  granted,  and  fhall  appear ;      BenediHusriiDeut 
yea^  a  lively,  and  mo(t  perfeft  Creature.  mjUr ! qui  "eipict 

Behold,  the  Angels  of  the  Lord  have  been  fent  down  from  God  ,   unto  him    gemism  Paupernm. 
{^.K.3  here  is  fight,  which  is  nf  this  houfliold  in  God  :  He  hath  brought  unto  thee       E.K  Nottafteroi 
(that  which  he  tafteth  not  himfelf:  And  yet  thtu  donbtejt,  faying.  How  fh all  I  fay    j''^'  ^  f^'l^*  °^ 
ithe  Angel  of  the  Lord  hath  appeared  unto  me?  "^^"^^^  ■ 

UiAo  thee,  |^A.]  we  have  appeared  :  for  unto  thee,  £a.]  we  are  ^'"'e-  A  How  the  Angels 
fent.    And  becaufe  bis  eye  hath  feen  ,  therefore  we  have  loyned  htm     °'  'he  Lmd  have  appeared  to 

*    ^7       *;*■!;        ■         r   I     1      n-     I  ■  i     ,i  r  A    which  may  leem  moreccr- 

mto  thee,  that  in  the  time  of  darkfieffe  thou  mightei  lee.  ";  „'      , 

1^-.         ,  ,        ■'  ^-^  ,,.  .,  tain  falmoft)    then    as   the 

A.   It  IS  to  be  made  And  before  the  time  oi  thy  vi-      phrafe  is  vei  ificd  of  the /l  sels 

rrfeft  before  the  time  fitation  thou  mrft  be  made  per-     appcarinp  tojc/f/iA,  infmnisy 

his  vifitation.  fcft.  -vJi  Maithsi,cz<?.-i. 

jLnd  becaufe  it  it  of  thee  and  not  of  him  :  "Therefore  doth  not  Gsk^  impute  unto  him  his  offen* 
*i,  hut  placeth  in  you  the  figure  of  time  to  come. 

ra  lib.  15.   1584.  Tor  fome  there  he  that  naturally  fjjall  draw  in  the  View  of  the  Lord. 

.'    Jtifiii  2.  And  other  fome  there  be,th^zt  muji  have  their  times  and  fcafons. 

For  thy  houfhold  affairs,  I  fay  nothing  yet,  neither  for  thy  Letter  fent,  or  Meffen-  ylnfwct  to  the 

T.      Nam  Deus  agit  in  fuis,  ficut  vult.  third  and  fourth 

I  have  nothing  elfe  to  fay  unto  thee  :  but  blelfed  he  tbofe  that  helUve  in  ths  Lordj  '*«™»n''^- 

tbeji  have  their  reward,  E.K.    She 


2.  2  S       ^  true  "^ReUtton  of  D^,  Dee  his  JlBions  V;ith  Jpirits,  6cc. 


E:  K.   She  ooethalway,  di'vided  into  ^  great  many  -pieces  of  fire. 

Peo  Noftio  Oar.iipocenti,  ecerno  i>c  fapienti  :   fit  omnis  honor,LausSi  Gloria.      Amen. 

Nste.  At  noon,  this  day  I  received  Letters  from  the  Lord  Ljfkje ,  from  my  wife,  and  fromi 
my  hrot!ier  NicoLts  Fromonds  in  E>;gU>:d  :  how  Mr.  Gilbert,  Mr.  SUd^  Mr.  Andrea  Firmorfiemy 
■aiy  Book-teller,  ufed  mc  very  ill  in  divers  forts. 

TheDares  of  the  Letters  from  England  were  of  the  15.  and  16'^.  day  o(  April  1584.    My 

wife  is  in  j^reat  forrow  for  my  brother  Ni:./;j/.w.      '  .        .  '     • 

,  j\t  jiioht  after  Sun  fee,  Bwfric/j  ^owt/r/j  brought  me  word  from  the  SpaniOi  Ambafladour, 

Si  17'.'  '""    that  he  had  delivered  to  the  Eniperour  this  day  my  Lettejs  and  Book  :  and  that  he  took  them 

"  '  jracio!  fly  and  thankfully,  and  faid  that  withiji  thncjor  four  dayes  he  would  let  the  Spanifli 

An.baflado'.u-!  nderftand,  when  he  would  give  me  audience. 

Tens  bene  vertat :  &  ad  fni  mmials  honorem  &  Laudem.      Amen. 


Saturday,  Seftemhris  i.  Ante  Mcridievi  Circa  10,  f  Pragje. 

A.  As  I  and  E.iC.  fat  in  my  litde  Study  rafter  our  talk  of  divers  matters  ,  and  of  my  ex- 
peftin."  audience  at  the  Emperoi.r  his  hand;f>i-.   £.  K.  faw  three  little  Creatures  walk  up  and 
downTnthe  Sun-lhine,  about  an  handfuU  from  the  pavyment :  and  the  Creatures  themfelves 
very  fniall,  nor  an  hundf  li  long,  like  little  fhadoivs,  or  finokes,  and   the  path  wherein  they 
walked  feemed yellow.  They  wall-ted  a  good  v^hile  co  and  fro,  till  at  length  I  fufpefted  thut 
they  vere  (eJitto  m  ;  and  fo  prepared  the  jhevv-llone  :  But  F.K.  faid  ,  he  bad  rather  fee   them 
thus  out  of  the  ftcne.    i  faid  that  in  the  Hone  we  liave  warrant  that  no  wicked  thing  Q;all  en-  , 
ter  :  bi;c  wiihout  the   f;one.  Hinders  might  deal  with  us  ,  unleffe  God  prevented  it,  €^^f.  , 
E.  K.  faid  again,  he  had  rather  deal  thus. 
One  of  the  J        .,i...'Hk  Wiaiungis- ah<.ve  thj  fight. 

ipirituii  crea^      £.  j^,  Now  tvvo  of  thciii  ieeiTi  to  kiicel  dowD  lo  thc  SiTH  beaiTis. 

H»ln  ti'c  mid- 'B'.ipd  he  God  the  Father,  God  the  Sen  ,  and  God  the  holy  Gboji,  the  moji  bsly  and  hleffed 

dle'o/t he""  '  Jr'in'ity  :  One,  true,  mighty,  perfea  everlajHng  and  inconipehenfible  God.  .  ' 
Th:e......             [a.   An)en,  Amen,  /^mcn.] 

' Wbichrptll  be  comprehended  With  thofe  that  live  in  the  Heavens  ii.Koi.  his  heart  is  %6 

(the  trueCh'-rcb  of  God)  of  fu:h  ai  nieirfure  hl->by  fdith,  and  not  reafon  :  be  turned  by  God,  but  j 

tfkich  h.tth  fent  is  to  do  his  will;  Both  in  that  be  will  turn  his  heart:  kno.v  no:  the  mesnin?. 

And  in  tb^-t  he  doth  vouclffafe  to  mal{e y}u  witnejfes  of  bis  fecret  pi:rPo~  A.SHH.'a'«</:.-^  fc/./w^m 

fes  ,  and  determinations    m  band.  ^-^ TaLh. 

Ihe  [i]  middlemofl  faid  — —  J  am  the  midji  of  the  thirdy  and  the  la]}  [a]  ofthefpirit  of  life: 

Vnderfiood  in  this  temporal  controverfe  ,  and  confiiii  of  mans 
Soul :  but  mt  according  to  bis  eternal  and  imm  en  fur  able  propor- 
tion. 

Flmlhm  Dei      "Hie^iXon  the  right  fide  faid J  am  the  fecond  of  the  third,  which  dwell  in  the  fpirit ,  and  pover 

cf  God  in  earth  :  I  have  power  to  fcourgc  them  that  refill:  the 
power,  will,  and  commandYnent  of  God  :  and  1  am  one  of  tliofc 
that  ftand,  and  is  perpetual. 

Tiinttas  &  II-      For  even  as  the  father,  fon  ,  and  holy  fpirit  are  one  ,  hut  of  themfelves  and  being  dilated,  is  full 
mas  Divina.  tf  tower,  and  many.    So  are  we  one  particularly  in  lower.,bnt  feparated  iHotwithJianding,fpiri-^ 

lually  of ,  and  amongil  others,  and  dilated  in  the  will  of  God,  and  into  the  branches  cf  his  determh 

nations  :  but  particularly  living,  andjoyntljr  praifing  God. 

E.  K.  Now  [3]  the  other  Cthe  third)  on  the  othcrfide  flandeth  up, 
andfayeth. 

5 'Xhe  Kingdom  of  God,  andofhisfon  ChrHl :  (which  is  true  God,  and  the  fUfa^ice  of  bit 

father,  T'rite  Cod  of  true  God)  is  contrary  to  the  Kingdom  of  this  world. 

^.  The  Confeflion  and  belief  of  the 

E.  K.  What  is  that,  God  of  God  ?  Catholick  Chmch  :  not  to  be 

talked  of  now. 

E.  K.  They  aredifappcarcd  :  but  their  path  appcareth  in  the  aire,  in 
fun-beams  ftill.  r     ,        ,     ^.  j  ac 

,  ,  .  A.  Half  a  quarter  of  an  hour  they  had  dil- 

E.  K.  They  are  here  again.  appeared. 

filii  fiJei  fy  p^appy  are  thofe  that  are  of  his  Kingdom,  for  it  hath  r.o  end  ;yea,  happy  are  thofe  that   are 

m«  ramms       ^     ^        £  j-^l     ^^,^  ^^^ j  ^f  j^g  ^yo,-! J ;  ^-^^vi  is  called  Realon.  /;  bicb  is  blmde,  and  is  fealed. 
kumantc,  '  fgiXo 


A  true'Kclation  of  D^  Dee  his  Jciiofu  mth  fpirits,  Sec,       zzg 


hft  ;.  letters  of  the 
I.  line  of  the  fouitFi 
Tabic. 


Rod  if.  Vide[\\,.  I  J. 

Ga 
Za 
Vaa 


} 


And  when  itexceedecli  the 


Angeli  obfervantes 
Noiira  opera  &  con- 
ftlia. 

Strike. 


with  the  »tark^of  '^■eliruaion,     Becaiifefi>e pr:fecute^,'znd puc  to  de^ith  the  Sort  of  Go-i^thi  God  of 
rie,bte0"fi!''lfe  ,  and  light  of-  all  that  live.  * 

I  am  the  la  i^o'^  tht;  fi'ityof  the  fourthjiind  I  have  power  to  gather  np  the  b!ef~        A.  His  namjistfis 
•Ejus  orticiiim  eft  tranlplau-  fi»gi  of  God, and  to  fet  theVifif  tijej 

tatio  !  )onoruin  Dei.  be  difdained)  in  a  better  [ojl. 

3.  Fvi't'yn  fayeth  theGodofHoafts. 

I  lie  dream  »nd  will  not  hear  me  Gather  tip  that  he  hath,  and  that  which 
Jhould  be  given  him  :  that  his  life  may  be  fliorr,  andhithohfe  without  comfort: 
that  he  may  p.iffe  nvay  nak^ed'j,  as  a  Jhadow. 

As  '0,  behold,  re  go,  and  we  will  dwell  there  ij'ea  ,  even  tntbe.skjrts  of 
their  (Jarnietits  will  we  takj"  up  our  habitation.        And  why  ? 

^,-h>:'dytbii  hath  God  tn'id:  In  the  morning  vf^tch  them  ,  and  fee   how.    they 
rife.   In  the  day  time. give  tar  vnto  them,  and  li  lie  motto  their  counfels.     Stand 
c'je^  < hem  in  the  ni^ht.)  and  note  their  filthiiteffi 
number,  ftrike, 

Jf'e  are  they  that  mufi  dire&  yovr  fra&ifes. 

, Behold,  let  us  give  leftiiriony  of  ov.r  names. 

I^iynameis •  Qj •  E.  K.  He  in  the  middle. 

jijynameis Za  ?A.  The  three  names  make  one  name  of/.  Ltttets^  Gazavaa. 

l/lynawe  is •  V.ta\ 

S)  we  are  called  ^xpoiition. 

Iko'i  .Ih'tlt  find.-  Its  amongjt  the  mercifull  Tables  delivered  unto  Enoch :  and  fo  unto  you. 

I'be  Middlemoji  fl  am  of  the  third  'table,  and  am  extream.  A.  Of  the  Phy- 

I  am  of  the  third,  but  of  the  humanity-,  and  the  fccond.     iick  part. 

A, Note  the  third  Table  here  meant:,  is  that 
,,  of  the  South,  as  b/aft,    VVeft,   South,  and 

"^  North,  their  placing  is  others. 

J  And  I  am  the  fourth,  but  y^ngular  ,  and  extream.  Linear  of  the  upper 

IK 


Note.' 

One  of  them 
fayeth. 


I. 


3 


MOjh 


A.   The  three  laft   Lett#is  in  the  uppermoft 
line  of  chf  fourth  Table. 


\.„i.JFe  are  gone. 

A  voyce.  Follow  that  which  is  commanded  thee. 


E.  K.  They  are  out  ot  fight. 


Vaa- 


Vltimm  fpiritus  vivorum. 
■  Flag  llator  refidentium  potejlatij 

voluntati,  pr£Cepto  Vei. 
•  2  ranfplantator  Donorum. 


A.  yEterno  ,  Oinnipotenti ,  Trino&uni 
Deo,  fit  omnis  hoiwr  Laus  8t  Gloria. 


Monday,  Septembris  3.  Mane.  t  Pragas. 

A.    Nota.    Sathanx   aftutum  &  violentitm  Stratagema. 

A.  There  was  great  difquietnefle  in  E.  K-    being  come  home  from  our  Hofts  hoiife,  where 
he  had  Ij  en  all  night  upon  a  form  :  by  reafon  he  had  been  (which  lie  never  was  r!ie  like  aforej 
as  he  faidj  wicn  uuie  overcome- fudcknly  :yec  intending  with  hiinfelf  to  take  heed  of  being 
qferihot  in   drinking    of  wine  :  being  rcqueftcd  by  the  Hoftes  togiveher  a  cjuarc  of  wuie 
upon  the  i-;ood  baigainhehad  inat^lock  he  bought  of  her  for  five  Suckats:  In  this  company 
of  drinking  was /i/<x..-«,!/tr,  the  Lord  L.)ii;;e  his  fervant,  wiio  came  with  Us  16  Frage.    L[nto 
whom  E.  K.  (  wiien  the  drink  on  the  fudden  had  overcome  iiim^  faid  he  would  cut  off  his 
head,  and  with  his  walking  flaftcdid  toich  him  fair,  and   fofcly  on  the  neck  ,  fitting  before 
him  :  Tin's  Alexander  benig  half  drunken  himlelf ,  by  be  by  took  tucfe  words  in  great  fnufFe, 
and  went  to  defend  himfclf ,  and  fo  took  his  weapon  to  him,and  there'  pon  they  by  caufed 
Alexander  to  go  down  :  It  was  fupper  time  ;  and  J  that  night  retiained  to  fiippe,  and  fo  tarry- 
ing at  my   Lodg  ng,  and  lookmg  our,  faw  Alexander  litting  on  the  great  Hone  againfl:  our 
Lodging  :  f  called  to  him,  and  told  him  that  they  were  at  fupper  :  And  he  came  over  to  me, 
.«and  he  had  wept  much  ;  he  complained  cf  E.  K.  his  former  words,  and  the  touch  of  the  ftaffe, 
iiovv  it  was  againfl:  his  credit  to  take  that  in  good  part  ,  and  ipake  many  Souldicrs  terms  of 
I -ftout  words,  not  worthy  the  recording.     I,  thereupon  went  to  our  Hofts  houfe,  and  woidd  un- 
;derftand  the  very  truth  ;  and  there    1  found  E.  K.  fafl  on  fleep  on  a  form,  moll  foundly  :  for 
;which  I  was  right  forry  ;  /And  yet  better  plealed  to  perceive  the  words  of  EiC,    which  fo 
moved  Alexander  (being  half  drunk'en)  to  have  been  fpok en  by  E.  K.  when  wme  ,  and  noc 
wit,.bare  rule  :  and  fo  pleaded  long   time  with  Alexander,  that  of  words  fpol'^en  fo  m-  they  were, 
no  ftich  exaH  account  was  to  be  given  to  him,  &c.    And  after  two  hours  perfwafion  caiifel 
Alexander  to  go  to  bed  in  our  Lodging,  where  he  ufed  to  lye.  For  he  would  have  gone  outj, 


2  30        (fj  true  Illation  of  D^^  Dee  his  Mions  wh  ffirits,  &c. 


to  our  former  Inne,  in  thofe  raging  half  diunken  pangSjhc  was  in  :  vrhich  I  thought  noc  good. 
This  M>nday  morning  E  /f.  coining  honis,  and  {ec'mg  AUxandery  as  he  came  in  ;  he  fai^, 
they  teiU  lliould  have  fpoken  words,  which  greatly  otfended  thee  yefternight,  and  that  I 
touched  thee  with  my  ftaff,d^c■.  I  know  nothin^of  it,  and  (hokc  hands  friendly  witii  A/ex- 
ander.  \Nt\\  (zxiy^  A'exiinder,Si  fni^et  a'i'H^  Uc.  E  K.  came  up  to  me  :  I  told  him  how 
forty  I  was  for  this  mifchance,  and  told  him  of  the  Watchmen  perceiving  Alexander  his  dif- 
qiiiec  nitii  I,  and  hearing  his  word?,  they  came  to  me  and  charged  me  to  have  a  care  of  the 
peace  keeping  (  as  they  did  indeed  )  And  farther  faid,  that  Alexander  in  his  rage,  faid,  thic 
rather,  ot  before,  he  IhonH  cut  oiF  his  head,  that  he  would  cut  £ .  K.  in  pieces.  So  foon  as 
1  had  cxprelTed  that  word  of  ct\\s drunken  A''xa>i{er  likewife,  (  whom  now  I  faw  qtiier,  and 
E.  K.  alloquiet)  fudienly  E.  K.  fell  into  fiicti  a  ra-^e,  that  he  would  be  revenged  of  him  for  ■ 
fo  (ayin^,  and  for  railing  on  him  in  the  ftreer,  as  he  did,  &c. 

Mch  ado  I,  Ewr/c/w,  and  his  brother,  had  to  (lop  or  hold  him  from  going  to  Alexander 
with  his  weap;)n,  &c.  At  length  we  1«  him  go  in  iiis  dubblet  and  hofe,  without  a  cap  or  h^c 
on  his  head  :  and  into  the  ftreet  he  hafteJ  with  his  brothers  Rapier  drawn,  and  challenged 
Alexander  to  (-ight:  But  ^/f.v/r«ifr  went  from  him,  and  faid.  Nolo  Vomine  Kellcic,  Nolo,- 
Hereupon  E  /f.  took  up  a  (lone,  and  threw  after  him,  as  after  a  dog,  and  fo  came  into  the 
S»t9n  hij  rx-  hcufe  a^ain,  in  a  nioft  furious  rage  for  that  he  might  not  fight  with  Alexj-ttder.  The  rage  and 
ceeJifi^  vehe-  |-^i^.^  ^j.'^f-Q  gj-j.^^  ;,^^^.,jpj^3,,jgg{^^,,.gj;^  35  might  plainly  prove,  that  the  mckjd  enemjifmght 

tation.    '"''     either  £.  K.  hi-;  own  dejhoyinz  of  hhttfelf\  or  of  we,  or  hii  brother,  &c. 

This  mayfutfii.e  tonotifie  the  mighty  temptation  and  vehement  w  'rking  of  thefubtile  fpt- 
Norf  thecjufe  jitual  enemy  Satan,  wherewith  God  futfercd  £.  K.  to  be  temptr-d,  and  almoii  overcome  :  tomjr 
o;  rhjs  recor-   ^j.g^f  grief,  difconifqfi  t,  and  moft  great  d'i'credir :   if  it  fhonld  (  a-;  the  truth  was  )  have  corap 
S-  tofhe  hmperoursunderftanding,  except  he  had  known  me  well,  ^c.    I  was  in  great  doubt, 

how  ijod  would  rake  this  offence,  and  devifed  with  my  felf  how  {  might,  with  honefty,  be  • 
cleared  from  the  fham':  and  danger  that  might  arife  if  rhefe  two  fhould  fight,  eS^j.      At  tlVe 
kaft  it  would  crolTe  all  ^ood  hope  here  with  the  Eniperour,  &c.  for  a  time,  till  God  redref- 
fed  ir. 
_     f  ^  .  After  I  had  brought  E.  K.  to  fome  quietne(r-,(  by  yeilding  much  to  hh  humour,  e^c.  and 

timc^need  faying  little  :")  nftitjoiig  after,  came  my  msirager  from  my  wife  at  Crarovit  :  znAHiighmj 
fervant  with  him,  rt  wy  grftft  Crt-M^rt  through  hfr  letters  ,  and  the  full  fattsfying  of  me  b/ 
Hi'g^  my  fervant  his  knowledge  farther  than  conveniently  could  be  written. 

About  2  of  the  clock  after  Noon,   came  this  letter  to  me,  of  the   Em^erourh'n  fending 

Nobilis,  PraEclaridimeque  Domine,  Dominc  obfervandilljme. 

j^  .        /"^^fai',  jr^i  jam  fiz,!t/ficavit  PonttHo  Legato  Hiy-in/arum  ^    H^ro  meo^ut  Vominatisftef*  vf- 

I         jiram  iid  feevocdrer^ai  borantfecundarn  i  qui  earn  iudire   cuperet :    Vominatio  vellra  ft  a4 

diUam  horamve-nire pote^it  :  accedetJiatimDo'vinuni0^rvi!imSpinota»t,  qui  eji  Mtije'itti 

fii£  C^i^area  cL  Stahtdit  &   Ciibkulii .     Is   entm  ea,»,    ad  Muj.jiateyn  fuant  introducet.     ^od 

rtliquum  eji,  KieD-  vcjird  quam  ofjiciofifmh  etiam  o-tque  etiamcommendoy 

"Domination'u  vejtr4e  Studiofijfimns 

Arnoldus  VanderBoxe. 

Note  the  Original  letter  itfclfSs         Hereupon,  1  went  ftraight  up  to  the  Caftle  :  and  inthq 

in  this  Took.  ,      .    ,  .       j     Ritter-Stove  or  Guard-Chamber   I   flayed  a  little  ;  in  the 

Otuvms  Sp^noU  Ch'rnbedam  and  ^^^^  EmerKus  to  fee  what  was  of  the  clock  :    and 

Officer  who  IS  fent  into   J>4iii.  the  Chamberlain  ,    (  On^n^'ta  Spinola  )  fpied  hmi  out  of  the 

Emperours  Chamber  window,  and  called  him,  who  came  up 
tome,  and  by  that  time  was  the  Cnamberlaincome  out  to  mt  j  and  by  Emericits  he  nndcr- 
•  HorA  tenia  ftood  that  1  was  the  man  the  Emperour  waited  for.  He  came  to  me  very  *  curCeoufly  : 
txalliamni-  told  me  of  the  Emperours  deijre  to  fee  me,  and  to  (peak  with  me.  So  he  returned  to  the 
Einperourintothe  privy  Chamber,  and  came  oat  again  for  me,  and  led  me  by  the  skirt  of 
th«  Gown  rhrou^Ji  the  Dining- .chamber,  and  the  Privy  Chamber,  where  the  Hmperourfacat 
a  Table,  with  a  great  Cheft  and  Sraiidilhof  Silver,  before  him,  my  Monasand  Letters  by  him, 
&c.  I  came  toward  him  with  due  reverence  of  three  curlies ,  who  (hewed  me  a  gracious  and 
chearful  countenance. 

Then  I  craved  pardon  at  his  M.tjefties  hand,  for  my  boldneffe  to  fend  his  Majefty  a  Letter 
iind  the  Mj>tJS  Hi'-roz'yp'f'''^  (dedicated  to  his  father.)  But  I  did   it  of  fincere  and  entire, 
goodwill  I  bare  to  his  father  Mtximilian,    and  alfo  unto  his  Majifty  :   and  that  the  rather,? 
because  1  iiaJ  i;ood  proof  cf  the  favour  whi  h  Ahnigi'ry  God  bcareth  unto  his  Majeily.     Hci 
then  thanked  me  for  his  fathers  Book,  anrf  did  atfi.m,  that  he  believed  me,  that  I  was  affefti- 
onate  unto  his  Hishneflc  :     And  gf  my  eftemation  with  the  learned  of  the  world,  he  had. 

kear^ 


More  Comfort  - 

in  time  of  need/"''  ^^ 


die, 


I  ■  I  ■■■■--  ■    ■■         —  - -     II  ■  II  IT  .___^^__„_____ 

]_    ^:Atrue  %latwn  of  D*".  Dee  btt  JHtcns  mth  fpirits,d<.c  1 3 1 


of  my  zealous  mind  towards  his  grace.     And 
too  hard  for  his  Ma  jellies  capcity  ;    and  ad- 
pinilh  Emliai'fadourcold  liim,  that  I  had  fomewhat  to  fay  unro  him,    ^od 
"i^it  pr«  fna  rttlitate.     I   aufwered,  Sol  have,  and  withal  looking  back  whether  any  man  were 
-in  the  Chamber  or  no,  I  fo;uid  that  we  were  aloue  :    Hereupon  I  began  to  declare  chat  All  my 
'lifetime  [  had  fpent  in  learning  :  buc  for  this  forty  years  continually,  iu  fund  ry  manners,  and 
ill  divers  Counrries,  with  great  pain,  care,  and  coil,  I  had  from  degree  to  decree,  fought,  to 
come  by  tlie  b-fl  knowledge  that  man  iTiigiit  attain  unto  in  the  world  :  And  I  found  (at  lengh) 
,  that  ncirher  any  than  living,  nor  any  Book  1  could  yet  meet  withal,  wa;  able  to  teach  a\t  thole 
tniths  I  delircd,  and  longed  for  :     And  therefore  I  tonclilded  with  my  felf,  to  make  inter- 
'  ccinon  and  prayer  to  the"  giver  ofwifdom  and  all  good  things,  to  fend  me  fuch  vvifdo:!!,  as  I 
ought  know  the  natures  of  his  creatures ;   and  a!fo  enjoy  means  to  ufe  them  to  his  honour 
aiid  glory      And  in  this  purpofe  made  divers  alTaye-;  :   and  it  length  it  pieafed  God  to  fend 
mc'bis  [a]  L/^/y,  whereby  I  am  allured  of  hismerciful  hearing  o:  my  long,  fervent,  conftanr,  ^  ^^j^.^^ 
and  coiuinual  prayer,  in  the  caufe  before  fpecliicd  :    And  that.  His  holy  Anjels,  for  thcfe 
two  years  and  a  half,  have  ufed  to  inform  me  :   and  have  fiuilhed  fuch  works  in  my  hands.  Books  fiaiiheJ. 
jto  be  feen,  as  no  mans  heart  could  have  wiflied  for  fo  much  j    yea  they  have  brought  nte  a. 
5fo"f  of  that  value,  that  no  earthly  Kingdom  is  of  that  worthineife  as  to  be  compared  to  the  A  Stone      • 
vertue  or  d.gniry  thereof,  €^c.     And  that  thefe  things  be  true,   I  protefted,  and  took  to 'roue'it  by ^ 
witnefle  the  God  of  Heaven  and  E^nhjhy  whofe  Commatidnjei'tt  I  am  now  before  your  Majefty,  g'^°<>  ""ge'* 
^(  faid'I  )  and  have  a  melFage  from  him  to  fay  unco  you  ;  and  that  is  this  : 

The  Angel  of  the  Lord  hath  appeared  to  me,  and  rcbuker.h  youforyovir  Ciil'.     If  you  will  My  meflape  w 
,'    Ji  ear  me,  and  believe  me,  you /liall  Triumph:    If  you  will  noc  hear  me.  The  Lord,  the  Godt'^e  Em'^eiout 
:(     that  made  Heaven  and  Earth,  (  under  whom  you  breath,  and  have  your  fpirit  )  putteth  his  ^ ''"'f''' ^"«* 
foot  againll  your  breaft,  and  will  throw  you  headlong  down  from  your  feat. 

Moreover,  the  Lord  hath  made  this  Covenant  with  me  ("by  oath)    that  he  will  do  and 
J    perform.    If  you  will  foifake  your  wickednelTe,  and  turn  unto  hiin,  your  Seat  fliail  be  the 
j    greatefl  that  ever  w:as  :  and  the  Devil  Hiall  become  your  prifoner    :     Which   Devil,   1  did 
coiijefture,  to  be  tfie  Great  Turk,(  faid  I  )  This  my  CommilHon,  is  from  God  :    I  feigne  no- 
thing, neither  amt'an  Hypocrite,  an  Ambitious  man,  or  doting,   or  dreamiug  in  this  Caufe. 
If  I  fpeak  ocherwtfe  theii  I  have  juft  caufe,  I  forfake  my  falvation,faid  I. 

The  Emperour  faid,  he  did  believe  me,  and  faid,  that  he  thought  1  loved  him  unfaignedly^ 
•ind  faid,  that  I  (hould  not  need  fo  earneft  proteftacions  :  and  would  not  willingly  have  had 
me  to  kneel,  fo  often  as  I  did. 

Farther  I  faid.  His  Majefty  was  to  fee  and  nnderftand  nakedly,  from  the  beginning ,  the  All  the  rourrs 
whole  courfe  of  this  Angelical  leading,  inftnifting,  and  comfoitiiig  of  me  :  for  fo  I  was  com-  "fo-"  Mions 
nianaed,  that  I  Qiouldfrom  the  beginnirj^,  nakedly  open  unto  Rodolph,  the  manner  of  ood  '"'^  m         b 
his  vifitation,  and  flievr  unto  him  the  holy  Vilion  :     Which  my  charge  I  am  ready  to  do.  Tha  ii4vve/ to°thc 
tmperour  faid,  at  another  tinie,  he  would  hear  and  linderftand  more.    I  fpake  yet  fomewhat  Empeicur. 
piorein  the  purpofes  before,  to  the  intent  they  might    get  fome  root,  or  better  ttick  in  his 
iiiinde.     To  be  fhort,  he  thanked  me,  and  faid  he  would  henceforward,  tal{e  nte  to  his  re-  om- 
»«c'W:/fzo>?/iWr<trf,  and  fome  fuch  words  (  of  favour  promifed)  he  ufed,  which  1  heard  not 
\  weM,  he  fpake  folow.     In  the  end  perceiving  fhdt  his  will  was  to  end  for  this  time,  I  did  my 
I   duty  with  curfie  ;  and  at  the  door  going  out,  I  turned  back,  and  made  curlie,  and  fo  came 
■   into  the  nextC  amber,where  the  Noble  Ociaviiu  Spin'oln  came  to  me  again,  and  wiih  curte-  03hv'wi ypin0' 

bus  words,  offered  me  great  friend/hip.     I  rook  my  leave  of  him,    and  (b  came  through  the  '-•• 
I  Ritters  Stove  or  Guard  Chamber,  and  fo  down,  and  hbme.     I  had  a  large  hpur  audienceof 
his  Majefty. 

Veus  bene  vert  at :  adfuinomiHisLitudem^Homremj&GIorijm.     Amen. 


I 


Wedenfday,  5f;)ff»;i'f/j,  5.  1584-    Mane  circiter  horaift  S.     f  Prags,  . 

;  Trecilusfinitis^  &c.   Repetivi  ter  banc  Sententiant  Mitte  lurem  tuam  (  0  Bern  )  &  verita^ 
fCM  Xuam  qu£  ms  durat  &  per  ducat  ad  monteni  Sandum  Sion  &  'lakernacula.  ccelejiis  H'lernfalem. 
'■  A.  I  have  to  the  beft  of  my  ability,both  written  andfpoken  unco  Kodolp'^  as  1  was  willed  : 
Ijow  it  workethor  takcth  place  in  his  heart,  is  known  to  thee  O  God,  &c, 

i.  Now  I  am  to  receive  farther  inftruftions,  what  is  to  be  done    in  this  caufe,  or  clfe  what- 
ifocver  fliall  pleafe  the  Higheft,  &c. 

-l  £.  K.  Now  here  is  Vriel,  and  ^  hlach,  thing  lih^e  a  Sarcent  offilke  be-  tf^^'noi^^ 
i5>re  his  face,  and  over  his  head  behind  :  by  the  reft  of  his  garments  "^^  ^J""^hth 
it feemeth  to  be  lyrid.  ^^^  highly of- 

,  fended  God. 

t.  Godmakeallthmgsvvhitc,andmakeus  whiter  than  Snow  ;    What  that  Jblack  Scarf 
inipprjcth  1  know  not  5  but  I  fufpcft. 

[gg  2]  Uriel.... 


_  ..   ■      II.  ,...,■■■11  II       ■■!■■■■■ mmt  •"•  ••         ii-^«.  ■■  I"  ^' 

231      J  true  Relation  0/  D^  Dee  his  ABionswh)fmts,  ^c^_ 


Uriel Si'ch  as  defje  the  feat  of  the  Soul,   and  ate  fiifocatei  With  driinkennefl"e#»tfr 

^•'^j^''*^"    notiHlothe  Kingdom  of  Heaven, neither  C2inhd\o\drhe  ornafncnts  of  thf  Lord  his  beauty. 
bcenmcivil-        See,  how  Satan,  hotP  he  runneth  headlong  aboHt  and  throus^h  JO'!.     See,  how  he   makfthhi/difief- 
Joufly  diunk,    ling  place  within  you  :   of  whom  the  Lord  gave  you  warning,  fayi'ig  :    Saca,}  feekj?th  'H  fift  jm. 
&c.  1,0,  he  hath  dtne  wirkjdnejfe  againjl  the  Lor d^  and  ag.iinji  you  ;  for  he  hith  blemijhed  the  eyes 

Satan.  tfyctirunderjranding.  '"'01 

[E.  K.  He  fpcaketh  other  words  between,  .which  I  underftanc! 

not.  j  ■  '.J      '»(•; 

Jefuf.  Uiitl h  not  Jefus,  Gody  and  the  HighPrieJi  of  the  Lord,  ■placed  on  the  right  haniofhit 

Father?  ,     .  ?.-irio , 

L.    He  is  :  we  believe  it.  ,.    I 

tZach.cap.j.a.       Lliiel Is  mt  Sitan  (^  as  t^?  f  Prophet  fiith)  fufercd    to  'land  and  triumph  on  lSk,% 

light  hand  of  the  Lord  of  HolhanJ  Jaltice,  ai  the  open  enenij  of  the  Lord ,  and  of  his'ati^ 
tiointed. 
The  overrli'ow      True  it  is  :    and  he  hath  almoft  given  you  the  overthrow, 
klmoft  given.        ^^  ^/i]ft  us  O  GoJ,  and  be  our  ftrengch  againft  chis  moft  fubni'.e  and  mighty  enemy. 

Uriel.  ......  But  becaufe  he  is  (ilhzWe,  and  h^th  powe^  givet  u>i::o  him   ''or  iz  timi'.,  attd  hath  Uri- 

ven  againiiyou,  not  for  your  own  fakes,  (  hut  becaufe  yn  are  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Hizjieii  )  ani 
The  eye  EK.  againii  hii  tejlimony  :  'Therefore  doth  not  God,in.hit  Jujiice  impute  thp  ijus  of  the  eye,  unto  thjt 
the  body  A.    body. 

[  A.  Lord  thy  mercies  are  infinte,  praifed  be  thy  name  *^or  ever.  ]) 

By  the  eye       Uriel Bat  cowmandeth  the  [a]  eye  to  be  reconciled  ,  as  ihe  fpirit  of  Truth  butb. 

is'underftood    taught. 

E.K.  the  Seer  £.     K.    Hc  IS  gOne. 

in  ih.s  ..ftion,  *-'  *  ,  t  i       /->    j   r         • 

andhyihcbo-      Vide  Septenih.  l^.  h.   Glorified  be  God  for  his  moft  loving  kindnefle 

dy  is  under-       of  Reconciliation.  and  infinite  m^-rcies  toward^!  us  fraile,  and  imful 

flood /lini^ee  creatures  :  and  wc  befeech  chee  to  fhew  ust^e  light 

^'  of  thy  countenance,  to  our  comfort  and  direftion. 

Amen.  <i 


A.    As  1  was  putting  up  all,  7Jriel  appeared  again,  with  his  black  Scarf,  as  he  did  before  : ' 
but  paufed  a  while  before  he  fpake  any  thing. 

A.  In  thy  name  (  0  Jefu  )  we  attend  thy  words  by  thy  meflager  to  be  uttered. 

Uriel Give  ear  wito  my  voice.  " 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  become  like  a  great  wheele  of  fire,  like  a  waggon 

A      wheel :  He  thruil:  out  ];i.  hands  on  the  fiiddcn  ,  and  fo  became  like  a 

wheel  full  of  mens  eyes :    it  turncth  round,  it  is  full  in  all  places  of 

thofe  eyes,  like  living  ard  feeing  eyes.  \ 

V  Now  Cometh  fire  out  of  ir  in  4  places. 

Now  there  is  a  great  Easjle,  vn  hi ch  is  come,  and  flandeth  upon  it  :  It, 
Eafic"  **  "^  is  a  white  Eagle  :  The  wheel  turneth  ftill  ,  notwithftanding  that  /he 
flandeth  on  it. 

E.  K.  She  hath  in  her  b-ake,  like  a  fcrol  of  parchment.  She  hath 
two  monftrous  eyes  :  one  like  fire  red  j  her  right  eye  as  big  as  my  fift,, 
and  the  left  eye,  is  Chrvftal-like.  She  ftandeth  hovering  with  hct 
wings  fpread,  and  her  fte'-n  or  taile  fpread.  r 

Under  the  wheel  is  a  ei-par  valley,  and  in  it  a  gieat  City,and  a  Hiltdn 
the  Eafi:  part  of  ir.  And  all  rjward  the  South  are  Hills. 

TheCity  isasasbigas  fix  of  Craco'via  rand  many  ruins  of  houfej 

in  it  there  appear. 

„  Ther^is  one  place  in  it  covered,  f^uarre  like  a  little  Chappel :   I| 

hath  a  little  rour.d  pinacle  in   the    end  of  it  i  and   over  it  in  the  air, 

hanging  a  ^'it;tle  fire  b.ight. 

N  Therc'be  many  like  unto  fowlcs,  like  Ravens,  and  their  heads  like 

unto 


A  true  delation  of  D^  Dee  hh  JB'wns  "with  fpirits.  Sec,       23^ 


unto  bright  fire  : :.  They  flie  into  a  Country  a  great  way  off  from  this 

Now  Vrkl  ft;indeth  befide  the  wheel,  and  the  wheel  ii-  as  it  was  be- 
fore :  and  he  as  b.-fore  with  the  Scarf. 
^    The  Eagle cryeth  and  skriketh  as  a  Gull ,  or  the  Sea  fowles  do. 

IJricl  fcemeth  to  dcfccnd  ftoni  the  air  above^and  to  come  to  the  fide 
bf  the  Shew-ftone. 

Uriel ,1k''  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  be\V\tncKt9,^throveh  hit  mercy  and  f:.fferance  J  mtin  the  ^-  '"<^  ^^• 

\gice  of  ApoilUs^but  inthe  o^cts  and  dignities  of  die    Prophets  :   wWcjfr  is   alwayes  beautified'"^  ^'^  ^^'^\ 
with  the  wings  of  the  Cheruhims,  with  the  voices  that  cry  a  thoufani  thonfa.U  times  in  a  moment  he-  God  his     r 
f  re  the  Lord,  and  before  the  Ma]e,iyofhis  etemxl Seat  :  wherein yo'i  do  exceed   the'*  Temples  and  CiffTancc. 
of  the  earth  :    wherein  yon  are  become  pparated  from  the  worldy  and  whereby  you  are  lifted  up,  as  *  ^ich  have 
ffthe  houfhold  of  the  Bleffed,  even  by  the  very  hand  and  finger  of  the  H'Zljcti.  .  "°'  ^^^i  h  pre- 

*A.  Ble/Ted,  blefled,  bleiled,  is  the  Lord  to  whom  Cherubim  and  Seraphim  inceflantly  firi"  ^^f^^  ""geli- 
Sancius,  fiancliu,  SanaHs^  Dominw  ■  em  '/.ebatth.     Amen.  '  f  ca  . 

Uriel £«f  that  ic  may  appear,  t^</f^e/f*f,  that  rfw^/ff*,  which  gathereth  theC'andstd^  j)^,,a.uii,., 

f  ether,  and  is  the  breath  of  all  things  that  live  :   Becavfe  I^fay  it  ynay  appear  that  the  Lord  vifit-  revelJt 

ech,  and  if  of  power,  and  that  the  i'naginations  of  man,  fl/e    befor.e  themfelves,   as  the  dftf  of  the 

earth  dovh  before  him  that  movethtt:  1  open  unto  you  a  Seal,     yet  fecret  and  not  kj:own.  ASeal  opened. 

Q  A.  Zjch.  13.  —  Et  erit  diesuna,  qux  nota  eft  Domino,  &r.  ]  Zjchiry  13.' 

Behold^  now  cometh  that  day,  that  is  known  unto  the  Lord  himfelf,  wherein  the  Kingdoms  of  the  '^^^'  ^' 
'  t^thjhall  begin  to  fall :   that  they  may  perceive  how  they  have  run  ajir  ay  :   and  bow  weal^they  are     ' 
f«  the  triumph  of  their  ponipe. 

Add  now  out  of  Hien.falem,  out  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  of  his  Son  Chri(i,  fl,allfaffe  out  and  ZJch-  cap.  13. 
flow  the  water  of  life  :  That   the  fayings  of  the  Angels  and  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  may  be  verified  ftp-  ^' 
on  the  face  of  the  earth,  fpokfn  by  his  annointed  Zachary. 

JVaw  Ihall  thofe  dayes  open  themfelves,  which  are  the  dayes  of  vengeayiCe.  ^'"  '"•''"^'^*- 

Mow,  Now  _ihalhhefewoes,  th^tt  have  been  fpokm  of  andfealed,  burji  out ,  to  the   confufion  of  the  ^TsUbS 
wicked,  andthe  cmuhihment  of  bis  Kingdsmywhich  is  am^inted. 

Behold,  I  teach  thee. 

Thofe  that  inhabit  the  holy  City,  and  nfurp  the  authority  of  the  Higheft,    are  cal'ed  in  remem-  ^  Prophefie  a- 


he 

Rod, 


Irance  before  the  Lord,  and  they  (hall  befcattered  /%  unto  the  mighty  hail,  that  thefpirits  of  the  ^^'"'^   ' 
'  ^orth  have  gathered  againji  the  day  of  revenge.  Clergy. 

They  are  become  proud,  and  think  ^here  is  no  God.    Vhey  are  lUff-necked  ;   for  they  are  the  fons      R„d 
^wieKedteffe.     Lo,  in  the  dayes  of  Rodolph,  Jhdl  this  come  to    pajjff  of  whom    the  Lord  hath       "If 
faid.    If  he  hear  me,it\d  believe  my  words,  Iwill  place  Thee  [a]  unto  him,  asa  mi«^hty  rock  : 
I  will  open  unto  thee  [£k]  (  for  his  inftrufkions,  and  fafegijard  to  come  )   my   determinations  in  E'-^'"*  ^PM- 
ian-f,and  h,t»  come.     And  when  he  bath  wiped  a^ay  his   dark^effe  ,  and  offence  of  his  foul    \'^'''"hftB.o- 
'^'\\\  z^^f3iV  unto  \nm,  to  the  terrour  of  allTSiatioHs.  J         J     t      dnlphoftaenda. 

■  For  Irejoyte,  when  I  exalt  fuch  as  are  weak^:     And  when  I  help    tL  comfortleffe,  am  I  magni- 


•'i^^'   Thanks,  honoiu-,  and  gfory,  is  due  to  thee,  O  our  God. 

.    Uriel And  behold,  the  day  of  this  vifitatien,  and  of  the  execution  of  my  judgements,  is  at  Another  Seal 

iand  :   And  lo  I  open  unto  you   another  Seal  (  Becaufe  I  have  faid  unto  you,  I  am  true,  and  opened. 
\pji.  )  An,    1588.  or 

In  the  year  eighty  eight,  (hall  you  fee  the  Sun  move  contrary  to  his  cou  rfe.  '  ^^."f « fr^  L/e.' 

■^  The  Stars  [^nJ]  tncrtzf ctheir  l- 'Jit :   and  fome  of  thevk*  fall  from  heaven.  *Math.i4.  c! 

•     Then  Iha// the  Rivers  run  blood: 
i      Then  Jf^all  the  wo  be  unto  women  with  child. 
((Th^Jhall  the  time  cometopjjfe,  that  this  Fropheftejhall  be  kjtown. 


itobe  kpown^^n_  1^88.-^  ^.  Which?!?  ?  For  I  have  nor  yet  had  (tlwt  I  remember)  the  year  notif.ed  tobe  ij38 
ifjrre  An.itf88.ThisPro^hsfieistobeknov*nAn,  158S.  • 


This  Prophefic 
nor  ycc  1688. 


mFor  lo,  the  Lord  hath  prepared  his  Prophet,  and  he  Jhall  defcend  from  the  Heavens  i^as  it  is  *  Malach.cap 

'tl>nitenhy*W[j\^ch\a.\\  the  Prophet.  1    ..  ■  r  4  K. 

Behold  I  will  fend  before  that- day,  (^notthztdiy  I  fpol^e  of,  but- the  great  ' day'of  the  Lord  ^^ol 
t\\*^  again  a;nongii  you.  '■-         .    '  AN 


A-  Note  twd 
day.s. 


^94-       ^  true^J^elation  of  D^  Dee  his  jBions  mthJi^tnts, ,Scc, 


Jn  the  mean  feafon  wdl  I  be  viercifull  unto  Rodolpb,  and  will  bring  into  kit 
'    Red.  Thebfjiitify-  houfe,  fi^ch  Of  fhtill  be  fkjlfull  ■:  mitt  vk»m  1  will  give  my  fpiriCjto  worl{_  Goldy 
jnpof  Rc(^(.7;i;Hisf£ac   Silzer^  and  ihe  Ornaments  of  hi^  houfe.     And  he  pall  perceive  that  I   bLffe 
Impel  ial.  ^^-j^  ^  j,^  j/_,^f  j  have  tied  him  to  mj  Garments. 

Jf  If,  he  bear  thee  not 

Vidi  hjyaSep-      Behold,!  have  one  in  ftore  :  Tea  ,  fiich  an  one  as  cleavetli  unto  Juftice.     Man  is  hut  a  Keed. 
temb.it.  that  is  Jhal{cii  with  ei'crjwinde.     "The  pride  of  Kings,  is  as  the  beautji  of  a    Peacock^:  See  borr   the* 

run  all  ajiray.  See  how  they  tempt  the  fpirits  of  rigbteoufneffe.  ^ 

Rex  I'.l  Lo.,  {as  I  have  faid  unto  thee)  I  rcfcrve  that  wicked  King,  no}jkat  lwillbe,friercifullmtohitji\- 

Stip'ianus.  '      Puttbat  he  HiaWlhovtly perijh  with  an  eternal  fcourge. 

And ?iow  hear  me  what  IJaj  unto  thee.  .   Hereafter,  fee  thou  tempt  me  npt:^ 

CAVE:    V'.elom^'j   AVitkf /ooi^  for  my  prefence  after  this  Order:    But  for  great  caufs.        * 

•  in  great  caufes  is  to  \>z       f^y  Iq^  this  is  the  end  of  Teaching.       Now  co.neth  in  the  time  ofvata."'^ 

looked  for  inc  and  of  counfe!.  ^- 

ioft'X'glr''"''"^       f.  .Will  y- S-'e  me  leave  to  fpeak  ?  'J 

Unei Saj, 

t.   I  trud  itfhall  not  offend  God  at  any  time,  to  call  for  [Uriel]  his  light  in  matters  dark^ 
EnochhttTn'  to  US)  and  above  our  capacity.       Alfo  in  Enoch  his  Tables  underJbnding  and  enjoying  ,  ye 
bles.  are  to  require  help  ofinftruftion  at  Ave  :  and  fo  of  other  points  and  Doftrines  already  begun, 

we  are  to  require  their  help,  who  have  begun  with  us,^t-.  * 

'  Uriel. As  far  at  the  Lord  hath  fuffered  you  to  enter  into  hit  Garden :  Iven  fo  far  (J  pj)' 

Talie,andeat.  P 

£,.   The  entrance  yet  we  havenot,  but  the  manner  to  enter  :.Thc  perfeft  praftife  Isihe  belt^ 
entrance. 

Uriel (Ji'tanfpeaketh  not  with  thee '.wherefore  doji  thouvinA  the  Lord.?  All  things  t^tt 

are  delivered  thee  are  plain. 

h.  Lord,  I  do  thus  fpeak  to  be  perfe^Iy  inftrufted  in  what  fenfe  ycUr  words  are  to  be  un* 
derftood,  when  you  faid  :  This  is  the  end  of  teacliing.  A.  Vriel^or  perhaps. in  the 

Uric\...*-.'lhoHhaJi  called  upon  we,and  I  h^ve  heard  thee.  name  of  God. 

Thou  haji  defired  comfort,  and  I  have  romjorted  thee. 
The  fpirit  of  choice      ^*»''  f'^J^  the  fpirit  of  choice. 
Vide  13.  September.  Be  it  fifficient  unto  thee  » that  the  Garden  ef  the  Lord  is  open  unto  thee  : 

Garden  of  the  Lord.  ff}j(Ye  there  is  no  huttgn,  nor  thirji,  but  a  filling  fpirit,  a  comforter. 
Note.  t  What  care  if  H  unto  tne,  if  the  Kings  of  the  earth  fay :  L^,  this  is  not  ef)»e.        A.   ExDeilu- 

Loy  this  is  not  of  the  highejh  mine. 

Uriel Behold,  I  am  the  light,  and  fervant  of  God  :  BlefTed  are 

ThlsTiftimony.  ,    thofe  which  believe  ,  and  are  made  partakers  in  this  Teftimpny  :  by' 

Advtntus  nomim,  ^^^  ^^.^.^  ^^^  ^^^  become  Prophets,  and  are  fanaified  for  the  coming,  , 

of  the  Lord.  • 

^.  Ke  Duttcth  us  in  re-     4,  g^^  ^^     ^^   j^  j  r^^r  „^f  ^^,^  ^^ve  defiled yo»r  fehes  ?  I  will 

ttietnb^ance   of  our  frailty;  ,        ^     ,    r     i-  it/  j       ni  r        i  1  cT  j   •    ;        1   .. 

Tnd  offence  comirittcd  be-     ^^K^  «?  M^  '*'«?^  tk.it  I  have,  and  will  be  gone,       Lo,  bleffed  u  he  that 
forenoted.  giveth  ear  un'io  the  Lord. 

E.  K.  Now  all  is  vani/hed  away,  anJ  he  is  difappcared  :  Wheele, 
Eagle,  Citic,  and  all, ^c.  -  , 

A.   All  laud,  thanks,  honour  and  jrlory  be  to  the  eternal  ,    AImighty,moft  j  ft  Judge,  and 
mereifuU  father  our  God,  the  God  of  Heaven  and  earth,  whom  ofhisinhnite  goodneilc  ,  we 
befeech  to  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  to  purifie  our  hearts  and  confciences,  granting  us  humble 
contrition, and  fincerc  confeflion  of  our  tranrgrelfions  and  iniquities  whatfoever.     Amen.         '* 
Note.    While  I  was  thus  requefting  God,  E.  if.  made  a  vow  of  penance,  during  his  life;', 
(in  token  of  hearty  forrowfulnefTe  for  his  fault  in  that  dayes  adion  notedj  ntver  t)  eat  his 
E  S. His  vow  [upper,  or  evening  meal  on  S.it".rdayes ,  during  his  life  jwhcre'm  I  bcleech  the  highcfl:  to  rega«<|\    [j, 
of  faftingdu-   j,is  inward  intent,  and  his  continual  mjmpry  of  the  Lord  his  mercies,  in  fparlng  him  when  liC^     ' 
'i"gli'«-         nioft  had  offended  him. 

A.  Deo  Noftro  vero,  vivo,omnipottnti,  &  eterno  fit  omnis  Honor  Laus  &  Bcnediftio, 
nunc  8c  in  pcrpetm  m.     Amen- 


Wednefday,   September  5.  NOTE.  ij  l 

A.  The  morning  of  this  Wednefday(bcfore  I  prepared  my  felf  for  the  former  aftign^  I  fegt 
£wfj-/r.'tf  with  two  Liters  to  be  dchvered  :  thcone  to  the  Span/jh  A  nibalfadoiir  (giving  him 
thanks  for  his  honourable  dealing  with  the  Emperours  Majerty  in  my  behalf)  and  the  other 
to  tlie  KoblcOclavius  Spinola  :  thanking  him  likewifc,  and  requiring  his  inftruftion,  or  adviffe 
how  i  might  molt  conveniently  proceed  in  dealing  with  the  Emperours  Majelly  :Thc  Cop/ 

of 


m 


Airm^fjelation  uf  D^  Dee  his  Mions  mth  fpiritsT^^      1^ 

»r  which  Uttei- 1  rhionght  good  co record  here,  thattheeffea  thereof  c^iti^'e^^^T^rrh;^ 
the  bg.K  of  the  Origmal  caiife  (Divme  and  humane)  annexed.  a      &  "- 

Z//#ri  e^  M.!g>ilfico  Vomica,  Vomhw  OBavio  ^fimU^  facrt  Coatee  Majejiatii 
\_  ^  .'^"^I'i's&Cubkulii  Domino  fuo  ohfcrvandifmo. 

ILhiftris  ac  MagniRceDomine:Non  pofTiim  fatii  condi;"nas  veftr^  Magnificientii  acrcre  ^ratl 
as,i>ro  imgulari  i!la,qua  me  Hen  amp!exieftishtimanitate&  benevolentia  :  homin^mquidem 
vobs  iiico£;ninmi,red  tamen  vncucis  &  veritari^  ftudiofilllmum  :  quiquc  o;mte  reliqruni  me^ 
vicT  curriculum  (Deo  lie  volciitej  in  hoc  co  fimicre  decrevi ,  ut  facra  fua  C4area\vA)ti{zs 
cV-r';  ■^t\-6^\zt\i^i-,iiicredibditer(i<:rh')fropt,.im  fore  Dei  Omnipotentis  tremendam  Maie/iacem 
Aiq  e  quamvis  videam  mulciplicibvs  multarura  Regionum  negotiis ,"  fuani  i^Acrzm  Cxfar earn 
Maj.flatemoccupanllimiunfepiirmie  tenerijHeque  aliis,  illifque  ame,  (u&izctxCxfarce  Mi]^- 
fra:i  p-oponendis  caulis ,  commode  vacare,  vd  pofTe,   vel  evidenti  aliqiia  racione  deberc" 
T  A  ME  N,   li  aliquis  excogitari  pofHt  modus,  pro  loci,  temporis,  &  rcrum  occafione,  quo  fua 
faaa  CtUrea  Majeftas,  ea  penes  me  viderc,  vel  ex  me  intelligefe  dignaretur  ,  qu?  illi  forent 
grata  ••  Ea  in  re,  veftra;  Illuliriffimae  Magnificentix  libentiUIme  audirehi  ve!  recipcrem  infonm- 
tronem  atque  Judicium,    Namin  hoc  totus  cro,  ut  tempore  debito,  appareat,  Omnipotentis 
Dei,  8i  fua;  facrspi  C£rure£  Ma jeftatis  fervitio  (Maxime  auteni,pro  Sacroianftie  Orthodoxx  Ca- 
tholicjp  8c  Apoftolic^e  tidei  Jlluftracione,  ac  Reipublicx  Chriftian*  dcfenjione  ,  ampiiHcatione- 
qHf)  AJdiaiiliraam,  devotiirmium  ,  fideliffimumque  me  cfle,  ac  forefacrs  fu^C^^re*  Majc- 
ftatii  fervitoreiu. 

4.  Septembris  1584.. 
OpPortunit^fi*  flos  mature  colligi  debet  : 
Cito  enim  fiet  marcidus. 

I/lujhifwu  Magnificenti£  ve^r£ 

ParatiSimm 

Joannes  Dee. 

tmrkus  wehtand  delivered  toy  tetter  to  the  Sfanijh  Ambafl^doi^r :  But  this  he  brought 
back  again;  faying,  that  the  Emperour  was  ridden  very  early  abroad  to  Br  andeifh^  or  elfe- 
where:  (notcertamly  being  known)  and  that  thi»  Noble  (?5/zz//»f  i>«(7/«  was  gone  with  his 
Majefty. 

Hereupon  I  determined  with  changing  the  Date,  to  *  fend  unto  him  at  *  Panum  em  dk 
cbe  Emperour  his  Majeities  returning  to  fr«gf.    Veus  bene  vertat,  tLSeptembJequente, 

CMr.  DoQor  Hagek  his  fen  vm  At  mon  xhit  I  fent  Letters  to  my  wife :  to  raj 

h  ^"J'  Lord  L«^i>,aiid  to  Mr.ViulHertoUy 

by  the  Meffager       of  Reichentiemj 
on  this  fide  N  Jfe. 


'MonAnY  1  Seftemh.Manehora  g.  t  Pragse. 

■^.frecibw  fittitit ;  T  inviied  Gay  Z.?,  Vaa ,  (as  being  afligned  to  underftand  of  Kodolph  his 
!oings,)  that  of  them  I  might  receive  inftruftlons  i  that  my  proceedings  might  be  anfwerablc 
[isoccaiion  ftiould  be  given. 

\E.  K.  There  appeareth  written  ir.  great  letters  upon  a  right  hand 

ifind  no  body  appearing:)  the  hand  being  very  big. 

■         *  1 

Oil  eft  habet :  ? 

Cni  nihil  non  hahehit.  ^ 

E.  iT.  And  fo  the  hand  vanifhed  out  of  fight :  The  writing  was  in 
he  palm  of  it. 
A.  After  that  appeared  the  fame  hand  again,  with  his  writing 

t'^  Fncei&  fa&titti  eritf 

Vltraynonhabtf,  Vltraom 

haiet, 

'^  E.K.  It 


E.K.    It  Van i filed  away ,  by  and  by,  hand,  writing,  and  all. 

A  Further  1      ^'  I  take  this  (O  Lord)  in  this  fence  :  That  I  am  to  proceed,  and  to  do  as    I  intended  ,  i 
have  n.  t  w'    either  writing  to  Rudolph  himfelf  ,  or  to  the  Spanijh  Amballadour  ,  or  to  Oilavins  Spinola  fc 
layjor  do.        the  Eniperour  to  give  me  audience,  time,  and  place  to  hesir,  and  fee,  the  Records  and  Monu 
mcnts,which  1  have  to  (hew  him  .-  And  that  when  1  had  doni  as  was  commanded  me ,  that^ 
Thenche  piirpoleof  God  (hall  dZ/o  ie<^o;ff.  ^,  ^^ 

A.  Deiis,inadjutorium  noftnimintendetuaquenosdirigatfapientia,  ad  illiid  Facien- 
diimj  quod  tibi  maximc  erit  gratam.    Amen. 


in 

for 


Tuefday ,  Seftevih.  1 1 .     Hora.  9.  fere. 

Mifi  per  Doininini  Emericum  Sontagiiim  Secretarium  Domini  Palatini  Siradien/is  literas 
illas  ad  Dominum  Oftavium  Spinolam  :  qiias  fuperius  defcripfi ;  fediibi  in  illis  fcripferam  qu^t 
we  heri  awpltxi  ejiU.  Nunc,  fcripli,  </7^<i!  me  a'lte  piiucos  <//«  amplexi  eikiSySf  f  10,  (juique  otme 
reliquuntj  nunc  fciipli  quique  rciiquum,^^!-.  8t  pio  hcredibiliter  (fere)  propitia»i,  8ic.  fcripiJ, 
nunc,  Intredrl  Utter  (  fere  J  &  modo  mirahili^propitiam  fore^  SiC.  Et  reiiqua  oninia  fcripti  in 
fupra  annotavi  :  fed  dat;e  erant  hse,  11.  Die  Septewbrkt :  Ills  autem  priores,  4.  Septembris. 

Tradidic  iftas  .iceras  (Kmericus)  '\?agnifico  Domino  SpinoU  ,  jam  llatim  port  prandium  Ce- 
fare£  Majelhtis,&:craftina  die  (poll  millam)  pro  refponfo,  venire  juflit. 


WedneCday,3ept'e»tbrii  12.  Mane. 

A.  This  morning,  vvhen,E»«fr/r«  Sontag  went  up  to  the  Caftle  for  anfwer  from  the  Empe- 
rour'tBy  the  Nohie  O'laviut  Spinola,  he  received  the  eff^di  of  this  anfwer  ,  which  I  required 
the  fame  Emerkus  to  write  dowii  with  his  own  hand  ("foi"  fundiy  refpeft?;j  whi.h  his  oivn 
hand  writing  1  have  annexecl  ad  majoremrei  f.dcm.  And  becaufc  his  writing  is  not  eaiie'  tc 
be  read,  I  have  writteji  it  plainer  foinewhat,  as  folioweth  : 

Kefponfum  Imperateriit  per  Dominum  Spinolam. 

Sacra  C^farea  Majeftas  benigne  intellexit  quae  Dominus  Joannes  Dee,  per  fijas  Ma  jedis  Cu 
bicularium,  Dominum  Ociavium  Spinolam,  proponi  curavit:  Ad  qu2  ,  fua  Majeftas  gratiose  li 
fe  rcfolvit  .Quod  quandoquidera  Lacinnmiiermonemnon  omni  ex  parte  exafte  calleat :  pr^ 
tcrea  etiam  variis  Si  multiplicibusnegociis  occupata,  non  femper  ad  andientiam  vacare  polTIr, 
videri  fiut  Majeftaciut  idem  PominusPff,  cum  Magni(ico  Domina  Dodorc  Kurtzio  (qui   &; 
fux  Ma'titati  ab  arcanis  eft  confiliis,  fatifque  fidus,  eruditione  quoque  inligni  poller^  trafta- 
re,  si:  negotia  fua  concredcre  veiit. ,     ]d  quod,  hia  Majeftas  pralibato  Domino  Conl'Jiario fuo, 
Kmzioy  Mniinciari  curabit.  Sin  ve'ro,  fecus  Domino yo^<r;/«7  Dee  videbitiu- ,  fuam  Majelhtem 
qiiomoJocunque  tanJcm  per  occUpationes  facejre  poterit ,  defiderio  Domini  Dee  fatisfaftu- 
Vani. 

1 5 §4.  xii,  Septembris.  Emcricus  Sontagnis  wanu 

propria. 


A.  Which  anfwer,  both  by  word  of  month,and  thus  by  writing  being  received  (  y  me  :  and 
the  faid  Emenciu  being  (by  the  Noble  Spinola)  willed  at  Evenfong  time,  to  bring  my  anfwtr 
herein  5  which  I  gave  him  of  my  great  good  liking  the  fame,  and  moji  htanlle  thankj.  to  his  Maje- 
ih  •>  for  fo  wife  and  gratiout  hit  confideration  had  of  ihe  caufe.  1  req  ircd  the  fame  Emriciis,  tc 
imderftand  ;  vvhen,  and  :  ow  foon  Doftor  Cur\z,m  (hould  bemadepiisy  of  liisMajufties  plga- 
fure  herein:  and  fo,  aftermy  difpatching  of  £we*-ic/tf,I  endeavoured  my  (elf  to  render  thank- 
unto  God  for  his  mercies,  graces,  and  truth,  in  tliefc  Iiis  affairs  :  befeeching  himto  frame  my 
heart,  tongue,  and  hand  inYuch  fort,  as  to  his  Divine  MaJ£fty,my  dutifull  fervice,  doing,  may 
be  acceptable :  as  chiefly  of  nie  inccmled  to  his  honour  and.  glory  :  And  fecondjy  to  t! 
comfort  of  the  godly  and  cleft  :  And  thirdly  to  the  confullon  of  the  proi:d,  arfoganc ,  fcon 
full  enemies  of  truth  and  vertue.     A>uen, 


ThurCAayy  Seftembritii^  Mancphjraj.  f  PragT. 

I  received  the  Noble  O^aviui  Spinola  his  anfwer  by  E,i'ericM,  as  concerning  my  accept;  ■ '  f 
the  Ewperour  hit  gratiom  former  anfwer  of  condefcend/iif^  to  my  req^eji^fo  ynuch  M  he  convc:. 
»  On  Wed-   ^j^;^  _.  winch  my  anfwer  yeftcrday  *  night,  late  was  delivered  to  the  Noble  Spinola.     VVm^Cj 
ncf<^a)r.  ^^ijj.^  i^g  j-^-^^  j^j^^j.  „,y._^);^^gy  would  be  }noji  acceptable  unto  the  Emperour  ;  and  that  to  jitorrtfC- 

, .  ■  (meanii! 


^tme  Relation  ofD^,  Dfe  hif  J&icns  mh  lf>trits,^.c  lij 


meaning  this  Thurfday  )  the  honourable  Doftor   Curtz  flioiild  underftand  the  Enjtieroiirs 
pleafiire  herein.      Hereupon  I  willed  £;>;fnrw  to  go  up  to   theCaftle,  and  to  bring  iiimfelf 
in  light  of  chs  Noble  Spino/u,  if  he  could.     Thereby  to  help  his  meiiioryj  for  warning  and  in- 
formation to  be  giveji  to  the  faid  Dodor  Curt  a  :   That  fo  weaiighc  conie  togccher,  to  foou, 
as  conveniently  might  be. 

DeOf  omnii  UuSy  honor,  &  glorht.     Amen. 


Thurfday,  Septetnbris  i  3.  Ui'lttfte,  horam  circiter  9.  t  Prag^. 
A.  Trecihui  finitis^  and  the  cafe  propounded  oF  the  Emperour  his  Anlwcr,  for  dealing 
with  Doftor  C./rtz.,  a  man  of  his  Privy  Council,  faithful,  learned,  and  wife  :  upon  the  coa- 
lideratlons  alledged,  I  requefted  of  God,  his  pleafure  to  be  fignilied  unco  me ,  by  fome  of  his 
faithful  and  true  Mcflagers  ;  whether  1  fhall  ofenfy  and  fraikjy  dgal  with  th'n  Dolf  r,  fo,  as  the 
Eniperour,  by  him  may  underftand  that  which  he  rtiould  have  done  at  my  mouch  and  hands 
originally:  And  whether  I  may,  both  alone  with  the  Euip^roir  ,  and  before,  and  with  the 
faid  Doftor,  deal  in  this  Aftion  asoccaiion  (hall  fervc  from  time  to  time,  at  my  difcretion,  in- 
formed by  his  fecret  grace  divine. 

A.  Nothingappearing,  or  being  heard,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  fpace,  I  fufpefted  fome  of 
our  mifdoings,  to  be  the  caufe  of  the  Lord  his  refraining  to  anfwer  :  and  thereupon  I  did 
fall  to  prayer  for  mercy  and  grace,  and  deliverance  from  the  aifanlts  and  malitiouh  purpofcs 
of  the  Devil  againft  us  :  And  that  I  did  the  rather,  becaufe  as  1  felt  my  good  Ailgel  (  or  o- 
thcr  good  friend)  in  vertue,  fo  I  felt  Pi/i/"H»;,  fen Gbly,  bafie,  and  as  it  were  co  cerriSe  me 
with  my  offences  paft,  or  to  put  me  out  of  hope,  at  this  prefeur,  from  being  heard.  B  ic  I  held 
on  to  pray  divers  Pfalms,  and  at  length  againft  the  wicked  tempters  purpofeiy.  After  my 
prayers  and  affuring  E.  K.  that  the  fpiritual  enemy  was  here  bufie,  and  accended  to  fruftrats 
ttiis  daycs  Aftion  :  He  anfwcrcd,  that  againft  him  [  £.  /T.  ]  he  could  nor  prevail,  or  accufe 
him,  for  his  lace  notable  fault;  for  he  had  nude  a  reckoning,  and  forrowful  bcvailing  for 
that  his  trefpafs,  to  ch?  Lord,  and  that  he  doubred  not  of  forgivenefs  ;  and  that  he  was  fo 
reconciled  to  God,  that  Sacan  nor  any  other  wicked  accufer,  could  puc  him  in  any  doubt  of  j^jjq^^jjj^jJ,^ 
God  his  mercy,  €>(.\  And  he  fpake  very  well  both  of  repentance,  Gods  mercies,  his  juftice, 
■«nd  of  thefe  Aft  ions. 

Mary,  he  confeffed  that  by  reafon,  he  himfelf  was  an  rnmcet  perfon  to  come  before  che  Em- 
perour,  or  Princes,  d^c".  and  therefore  if  it  would  pleafe  God  to  difcliarge  hiu  of  further 
medling,  fo,  by  reafon  he  might  fecm  well  at  eafe,  &c.  At  length,  after  an  hour  appeared 
Vriel  ;  but  with  a  Scarf  before  his  face,  as  he  had  laft. 

A.  God  fend  us  the  brightnelTe  of  his  countenance  when  it  fijall  pleafe  him. 

Uriel True  it  is,  that  in  reff>e&  of  the  terrour  and  forr^  of  God  his  wrath  and  indignation 

in  (]i]  Judgement :   Reconciliation  is  made  ;  throttgh  thxt  fo-mer  which  is  given  unto  the  Luntl,  KiconcW'Mioa 
to  whom  nil  power  it  given  in  Heaven  and  Earth:  Bit  with  th.'  £  2^  congregation,  and  the  Wt^wj- of  two  focw. 
hers  of  Cbrifihis  body,  the  number  of  the  faithful,  the  Church  of  God,  you  h.ivs  not  made  reconcilia- 
ttoH,  And  tjneixforcyare  not  finners  worthy  to  behold  the  face  of  true  light  and  undcrftanding:  ;.,j./his°Ucei» 
for  there  it  a  double  Keconciliation  :  One  (^and  the  firji')  between  the  Confcience  and  the  Judge  :  yet  covered, 
through  the  force  of  faich  and  repentance  :    that  it  to  fay  ,   Recon-  i, 

•iliation  againft  Judgement.     Another,  (^  the  fecond  )  Keconciliatign        ^'l^  fupra  S  premb.  y.  2 

tetveen  the  Sinric  of  Truth,  (  the  Church   of  God  )  and  mans  Con-     ^liceyc  wascommindedta 
-  .  *■  ^  ■'  -^  b;  reconciled   to  inc  ap.ric 

laetice.  „f  r.uth. 

'Behold  I  teach  you  a  myflery'. 

I.   "Ihofe  that  are  at  onewithGod^fliallmt  be  judged  with  the  wicked  in  the  lu(l  Judgement  :  7^1^,1^  pj. 
Notwithjianding  the  Juflice  of  God  is  purr,  and  undefiled  :  and  fuffercth  noc   nuns   fault  un-       *     w 
puniflied.'    2.  But  he  that  u  at  onewith  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  made  one  with  hint,   and  without 
puniftimcnt, 

For  there  are  many  things  that  God  heanth  witneffe  of,  in  the  foul  and  fecret  Chambers  of  many  ^  AboccuhU 
that  Kcither  theblefed,  already  dignified,  nor  to  be  dignified^  do,  or  can  know  ;    which  is  the  caufe  mt'u  muni* 
that  the  foul  of  man,  (^  after  bit  body  fleepeth^  being  found  foWwicd,    it  received,   and  fnatchcd  we.  Sec. 
Mpjof  fuch  as  are  the  Melfagers  of  puniflimenc:  and  fo,according  to  the  multitude  of  their  fins,  are  A  temporal 
lnhorrour5and  puniftment.     Therefore  wtall,  that  are  punilhed,  ihall  be  danincd  ;  Neither  paMlhineht. 
is  it  evident  unto  the  Angels,  who  (hall  be  faved  :    I  fpea\  generally. 

Thereforewhen  you  ojfeHd,beaKo  reconciled  unto  the  Mithet  of  the  boufe  :    that  you  may   have  ^'^^I'fi*  «'*»- 
^«r<.  before /«<:/.»  as  arc  reproved.  -  Iicai eanaiiad 

Herein  yon  may  underfiand  the  retaining  of  fin;  For  the  [a]  re-         A.  Acdoite  Spidtum    S.an-*''  ^"^^' 
taining  of  fin  is  a  judgement  .■   And  therefore  it  is  necefjary  that  God     ^"f".  quo'-u.-n  rmiferitis  peccata, 
fifouldhold  a  general  day,  that  tbofe  that  have  tr'tlied  in  him,   and  in-     remimnmr  a, .-  p  ,«r«»,  re- 
tfatdly  hxve  been  forry  for  their  offences,    may  alfo  tajle  of  hit  mercy.      ji^E.  Muh.  1^.  C.  18  C 
Elfe  bow  could  it  be  verified,  that  the  Prophet  faith  ?  If  in  HcH,  thou        si  dtfcendcn  in  infunHiti^  t«  - 

art  tlfo  there.  iUu.  es, 

[hh]  H 


z  5  8      A  true  Relation  o/D^  Dee  his  jBions  wh/fints^  &:c. 


Ignis  purgath-      ^"^3  '•'^»'^»  f'-'^'"''  '^  <*  Caution  ;  ^///z«i  tA/Jt  are  forgiven  hy  tkCWc&jpafli  not  the  fire  ;  i«t 

„„.  y  that  is  forgiven  in  bis  heart  by  God,  in  his  Son  Chriii  ;  and  {tT^  reconciled  through  the  holy  Spi~ 

The  perftft  af-  rH^  to  the  body  from  whence  he  ii  falkni  is  fafe,  as  well  from  the  wrath  of  God  to    come,  as  the 

^''h^n^   ^Iw   pnnifliment  due  unto  his  offences. 

Church  wSp.-      ^^^  therefore  is  the  reconciling  of  brethren,  of  ^r eat  force.     Wherefore  *  hath  Chriji  left  his 

rir.  body  with  the  Church  ?     iVherefore  is  he  called  the  bread  of  Life  ? 

*  ."Viath.c.^.D.       I  fay  unto  you,  }tiy  brethren,  that  the  body  of  Chriii  dignified  and  glorified,  is  true  bread  j  is  true 

cowfort,  which  cieanfeth  finners  that  are  penitent,  and  wipeth  away  the  pinifhment  of  adverfity, 
A  Alimhtrc-      Hafpy  are  thofe,  that  eat  of  him,  and  that  account  not  his  body,  as  the  Jhadow  of  a  candle, 
vci     dicutx  B^-'hoid,  I  teach  you  :    Even  as  the  Spirrt  of  God  filleth  the  Congregation  of  the  faithful ;  fo  doth 

(h'li   coifus    thelodyofChriinowdignifie,  dW  and  deinCe  all  that  receipt  with  forrow  :  forrow   I  mean  for 
f'ffefhanta-    their  wickednefe. 
ftiuim.  But  lo :   his  body  is  become  an  offencfmtto  the  world.      Many  there  are  that  fay,  'this  is  Chriji  : 

B'>t  behold  I  teach  you.    Even  as  all  things  were  made  by  him,ffiritually :   So  are  all,  that  are  of 

his  Ele&,  nouri/ied  through  him,  bodily. 

Lo,  he  is  become  one  power,  one  God  ;  in  that  be  is  neither  fe£»arated  from  his  bod/j  nor  fe- 

parareth  his  body  from  his  Church. 
After  a  while  I  come  again, 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  gone  away. 

A.  We  read  over  the  premifes  to  our  great  comfort,  in  the  mean  time ,  while  VRI E  L 
ditappeared. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  here  again. 

S\,  Now  he        Uriel Oye  timerons  birds.  How  long  run  you  headlong  into  the  JFilderneJfe  ?    How  long 

anfwereth  to    ff  ill  you  be  ignorant  ?    How  long  will  you  tempt  the  Lord  with  thefpirit  of  fooliflmeffe  and  err  our  ? 
niyrcqiieft      Behold  thouhajl  not  judged  well  of  me.     Behold  thou  hafi placed  me  in  a  low  room,  and  haji  takjn 
firft  proponn-  ^f^^  Garland  fom  my  head,  and  trod  it  under  thy  feet :    For,  what   is  Rodolph,  that  is  not  at 
kudilp.        leifure  for  the  Lord,  the  God  ofrighteoufneffe,  the  King  of  Heaven  and  Earth  ? 

Are  they  troubled  with  things  that  are  greater  than  I  ?  Trix  it  is  ;  for  with  me  there  is  no 
trouble  :  for  where  I  enter,  I  fet  all  things  in  quiet.  Will  the  Counfellours  of  the  Earth,  fit  in  judge- 
ment to  frft  the  Lord  ?  0 ye  fooles  andjiarvelings  of  the  Earth  :  Oycu  of  little  underjianding. 
T^hink^  you,  that  ym  are  able  to  find  light  amongli  the  affairs  of  the  World?  true  judgement  in  tb^ 
jf  imagination  of  man  ?  or  verity  amongji  the  hoords  and  corruption  of  covet oufneffe  and  faljhood  ? 
If  he  be  not  at  leifure  to  hear  me  :  Have  not  I  told  thee,  that  J  have  another  in  jiore  .<*  Lo,  / 
fee,  allflefl:  is  full  of  folly. 

A.   It  is  not  yet  done  :  and  therefore  we  ask  counfel  of  thee  ;  and  I  thank  thee  (  O  Lord  ) 
Spiriii't  EUB-  ^r  rebuking  of  US,  before  farther  errour  committed. 

enif  quid' fit         Uriel Lo,  I  gave  unto  thee,  the  fpirit  or  choice:   and  therefore  I  wiH  regard  thy  doing, 

vii/epagiM/f- and  will  wink  at  thy  weaknefs.     1  will  bleffe  all  that  thou   tak^ejt  i»  hand,  and  will  cover  thee 
quente.  with  a  Robe  of  Purple  ;  that  thou  mayli  under jiand  that  all  it  mine,  and  that  I  raife  up  whom  I  lifi, 

Kodulp.        j„^  J  fay  unto  thee  again  :  Lo,  Rodolph  hath  heard  thee.  And  I  will  poure  my  Spirit  of  truth 
^mf«vfm4.  i,jto  thee,  and  thou /halt  be  a  light  unto  him. 

If.  But,  now,  \ihe  liverighteouflj,  and  follow  me  truly;  I  will  hold  nphit  Houfe  with  Pillars  of 

^.  From  tlic  HiacinU,  and  his  Chambers  pall  be  full  of  Modefiy  and  Comfort.    I  r»i!l  bring  the  Eaji  wind  over 
Haft,  Comfort  him,  as  a  Lady  of  Comfort  :  andjl^e  pall  fit  upon  his  Cajiles  with  Triumph,    and  be  Jhall  fleep 

toles'in  tertiam      Moreover  Iwillbleffe  his  loynes :   and  his  Houfe  Jhall  Jiand  to  the  third  generation  :  and  to  the 
gtnerittionem.    ^nd  ;  for,  now,  the  World  hath  hoary  hairs,  and  beginneth  to  be  fick,. 

If.  I/hedefpife  my  commandment, /wi///)«rf/A' /jpori  rfgd!/«/fiin»i;  and  in  his  dwelling  places 

^ecic&citqui-  jfjail  his  enemies  banl{et.  (  But  thofe  that  deal  with  thee,  let  themfow  up  their  mouth:    left 
'^^  beingcut  with  a  Razor,  they  fpeak  not.  )  For  thofe  that  negleU  my  Judgements  I   will  defptfe 

them,  and  their  feed  Jhall  wither,  as  corn  fown  out  offeafon  :  But  he  that  lovah  me,    I  will  multi- 
A/deteveo  quo  ply  him.  And  he  that  addeth  unto  me,  I  will  ^dde  unto  him  a  thonfand. 
m((rfoSo««m  eji:      But  lo,  thou  haft  the  fpirit  of  choice. 

5piri'w  "i/f.       ^'  P  ^^^'^  °P^"  '"y  underftanding  of  that  faying. 

Sims  fiipra  Uriel ^os  tu  eligis,  eleCiifunt :  quo  autem  defpicis,  defpiciuntur  etiam. 

Sept.  J.  A.  Dwell  thou  in  me  (  O  Lord  )  for  I  am  frail,  and  (  without  thee  )  ^ry  blind. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  gone. 

A.  Thy  glorious  name  (  O  Lord  )  be  magnified,  praifed,  and  extolled  for  ever.     Amen. 
A- ^  Tpake  this      A.  1  perceive  that  I  (hall  not  Jf«/ with  the  Poflar  C?<rr^  now.     Well,  1  can  let  him  undcr- 
10  £.K.       ftand  that  I  had  rather  deal  with  the  Emperour  himfelf,  aqd  fo  fliift  my  felf  of  him. 

£.  K.  He  is  here  again. 

Uriel Tes,  deal  with  hi»*  :   and  bide  nothingfrom  hint. 

X>,  CuTt^,         ^.  VVith  Doftor  Cwtz,  O  Lord  > 

Uriel /•      •_■  And  therefore  Ifaid,  He  that  addeth  mtt  me  ,  f  will  adde  unto  bim  * 

thoufand  ' 


<^  true  "Relation  of  D**.  Dee  his  Miens  mth  [pints, dec  239 


thoi'faftd  :    But  hf   that  flayeth  vith-nie  >,  lo^l  fwear^  I VDiUhiot  his  narw  from  life : 

([A^Libercagas  :  Deus  eft  enim  liber.  A-FranMya* 

•'£.  K.   Now  he  is  gone.  !?.';«-" 

,.  A.  Deo Omnipotenti,  Invifibili  Sc  mifericordi  fit  omnis  honor,  laus,  gratiarum  aftioj  &; ^o'if ^j,"' 3""^ 
i  :    nunc  &:  in  pernetimm.     Amen.  J°^.'  '*  *^" 


Gloria  :    nunc  &:  m  perpetimm 

.X.'!"*/" : 

;■■  ■  ■  ■  -lO  ■.,  i»  iH(.\i  v  • 
itoii,  Thurfday,  Septemhtit  i^:    Mant.     +  Pragse. 

T;^iEwfrir«f  did  bring  himftlf  in  fight  of  the  ChamberJain,  the  Noble  Ociavm  SpinoU  :  as  I 
willed  him  :  And  he  c-iWcA  Emericus  to  him,  and  told  him,  that  this  day  Doftor  Curtz,  fhould 
HHderlland  the  Emperour  his  pleafure,  to  confer  witli  me,  &c. 

Vo  f,mericiif  about  lo  of  the  clock  before  Noon  being  in  the  Ritters  Stove  (  or  Guard-Cham- 
ber) faw  Doftor  Curtz.  come  out  from  the  Emperour, 


nijtie. 


Friday,  Septemb.  14.  Mane^  circa  10. 

.'.  i  fent  Enter icui  to  Doftor  Curtz  his  houfe  in  parva  parte  :  with  my  commendations ;  and 
to  fay  that  before,  I  underftood  of  Doftor  Hageck^  Mr,  Doftor  Curtz.  his  defire  to  be  ac- 
quainted with  me  :  whereof  I  was  very  glad  and  defirous  :  and  now  I  truft  that  the  Empe- 
rour his  ma  jefty,  i)y  his  Aiithority  hath  taken  order  with  him   whereby   to   begin  our  ac- 

^■quaintance,  and  (  God  willing  )  our  perpetual  friendfbip.  The  Doftor  was  at  home,  and  to 
imericiu  (  faying  the  effeft  of  my  meflage  before  noted)  the  Doftor  declared  that  Captaverat 

''avtea  varies  occafionesmecum  contrahtttdjc  aniiciti<e,  &c,  and  that  now  he  is  very  joyful  bf  the 

-occafion  offered  by  the  Emperours  Majefty  :  and  that  this  day  fundry  afitirs  did  hinder  the 
opportunity  of  our  meeting,  but  to  morrow  at  any  hour  (at  my  choice  )  he  would  be  ready 
to  welcome  me  to  his  houfe  :  and  fo  with  theufual  phrafe  of  offering  all  his  fervices  to  my 
pleafurcj  he  fent  Emericus  to  me  with  his  faid  Anfwer. 

^os  Dt  us  coJijmgit,  Homo  m  feparet.       Amen. 

*'■  ^os  auteviVeiK&.C'efarcopK/atjCopu/at/finn  nianeant.     Amen. 


Sitrndzy,  Sfptemhris,,!').   A  Meridie  hora  (fere)  prima.       t  Pragae. 
I  came  totheforefaid  (  called  Doftor  ^  C/rf 2  :  about  one  of  the  clock  after  Noon,  tvho 
•had  all  the  day  been  ready  to  have  heard  me,  if]  wou'd  fo  have  had  it  :   but  I  fent  him  word 
in  the  morning  by  Emericuf,  that  after  Noon,  (  as  m  w  at  this  hour  )   I  would  come  to  him. 
'Being  come,  he  tntertamcd  me  curteoufly  :  and  two  chairs  being  at  the  Tables  end,  he  gave 
'bie  the  preeminence  C  by  a  friendly  kind  of  earneftntfrt  )  Then  he  told  me ,  that  long  hnce 
mGerii:an}'i  he  had  heard  of  my  fame,  and  had  feen  of  my  writings  :   and  that  he  was  very 
Ifeliad  of  the  opportunity  now  of  my  coming  ro  this  City  ;  and  that  otherwayes  he  was  delirous 
Wmy  acquaintance,  but  chiefly  feeing  the  Emperour  his  Majefty  Ore  tenm  (  for  that  xvas  his 
%Tirafc  )  by  word  of  his  own  mouth,  had  willed  him  to  hear  what  I  had  to  fay  to  hisMajefty. 
i  began  and  declared  my  longcourfe  of  flu  dy  for  40  years,  alwayes,   by  degrees  going  for- 
'ttard,  and  defirous  of  the  beft,  and  pure  truths  inallmanner  of  ftudies,whercinl  had  paffed, 
and  that  I  had  paffed  as  many  as  were  common 'y  known,  and  more  than  are  commonly  heard  f^  'i 

of.     But  that  at  length  I  perceived  onely  God  (and  by  his  good  Angels)  could  fatisfie  my 
defire:   whtchwds  to  underjiand  the  natures  of  all  hi^  creatures^  and  the  befi  manner  bow  to  yfe  ^- ^tudioruin 
them  to  his  divine  honor  and  glory  ^  and  the  comfort  of  the  ele&,  and  alfo  to  the  reproof  and  coii-  "'""""  '"f"'^' 
fvfion  of  the  adverfaries  of  hi<f  name  and  honour.  And  herein  I  had  dealed  fimdry  wayes :   And 
at  length  had  found  the  mercies  of  God  fuch  as  to  fend  me  the  inftruftion  of  Mic('fff/j  Ga-^*^:^"^^'' 
briel,  Raphael^  and  7Jriel)  and  divers  other  his  good  and  faithful  Meffagers,  fuch  as  I  had 
here  now  brought  books  (  about  18  )  to  (hew  him  the  manner  of  their  proceeding  :     And 
that  I  thought  it  good  to  begin  at  the  laft  book,  which  alfo  concerned  molt  this  prefent  Em- 
perour Kodolph.     And  fo  I  did  ;  and  fo  by  degrees  from  book  to  book  lightly,  I  gave  him  a     Kodv^l!. 
taftc  or  fight  of  the  moft  part,  and  alio  let  him  fee  the  Scene  breught  me  by  Aagelical 
miniftery,  d'-c.  _      ,.   .    -.        ,_  ^     ?.-v,  ^ti-  «r-,v  •  ,  ?  ^  F  ,- t» -^-.  -  -,n' 

All  things  being  feeridhdheard/thatTn  fix  hours  I  could  fliew  him:  at  length  he  required 
Cff  tne  what  conckifion,  or  fummary  report  he  fliould  make  to  the  Emperour,    I  anfwered  ,  as  « 

he  had  occafion  of  the  things  feen  and  heard  ;  but  if  he  would  follow  my  counfel  (fomewhat 
expert  in  thefe  Divine  and  Angelical  doings,)   That  his  Majefty  vyas  to  thank  God  for  his  My  counfel  to 
great  mercies  and  graces  offered  :.and  that  by  me  one,  who  moft  fincerely  and  faithfully  gave  ^o&qi  Curtx^.] 
his  Majefty  to  underftand  the  will  of  God  herein,  and  thaqJiis  Majefty  was  to  do,  as  Mary 
i^h%^)^?^^K^§^^'^^^3^'^  iaj  up  all  thefe  my  informations  in  his,.feeart,  and  to  fay  Eccc 


z 4©        aJ  0ae  %eUtkn  af  Df^  Dee  his  Miom  mthJpmtSy  da^^ 


fen  US  Domini,  fiat  voluntas  tua,  and  fo  to  attend  the  manner  of  the  Lord  his  proceeding,  while 
lie  framed  liis  life,  as  it  became  cvcr^  ChrilHan  to  do. 
»  Hefaici,thac  he  would  write  (for  his  own  memories  help)  fome  Aiort  note  of  his  obfeivn- 

tions  of  my  fpecches ,  and  things  feen  and  marked  :  and  that  he  would  to  morro\y  (being 
Sonday)  or  on  Monday,  if  he  conveniently  could,  make  a  report  to  the  Emperoui'jandfo  with 
all  .fpeed  give  me  to  uuderftand  further  of  the  Empci'our  his  Majefties  will  and  i^leafvtre. 
Hereupon  coiiiteoufly  he  brought  me  down  to  the  iheec  door  of  his  hoi*fc  ;  and  I  came  home 
after  (even  of-  the  Clock,  and  an  half,in  the  evening.  i "^^^':v  ■>■  •l-  •  ■"i  ■:  -\ ,  ;\v-\  ., , 

The  mercicof  God  be  on  me,  and  his  name  be  magnified  and  extolled  in  this  world, 
iui4,  for  ever.     Amen. 

'fjote.  In  the  mean  fpace  while  I  wasthus  occupied  with  the  forefaid  Mr.  Crirtz.  E.K.  was 
vi.li?ed  at  our  Lodging  with  a  wicked  Tempter,  w/!>o  denied  any  Chriji  to  be  :  and  that  as  the 
HealTo  f»id  j^^^j,|.  j-t-ceived  comfoit  of  all  the  Members  of  the  body  :  So  that  he, who  is  God, of  all  things 
fonincr"m'  Re-  received  comfort  by  Angels ,  and  other  the  Members  of  the  world  :  and  that  I  was  now  with 
corjs  that  J  one,  who  would  ufe  me  like  a  Serpent,  with  head  and  tayl  compafling  my  confufion,  e^r.  he 
had  noteJmi-earneftly  reviled  E.K.  in  divers  manners  :  he  faid,  that  £./C.  fliouid  be  damned,  and  faid  : 
nyaly,andun- jjj^,j.j.Qver,  thatof  our  praftifes  fliould  never  come  any  fruitfull  end,  6""C.  ,      ^  ,^^^ 

A.  The  eternal  and  Almighty  God  confound  the  Advcrfaries  of  his  truth  and  glory, 
and  of  hisSon  Jefus  Chrift  our  R.edeemcr,  and  the  Triumphant  Gonquerour  a- 
gainft.  Hell,  fin,  and  the  Devil.     Amen. 


P  R   A  G  jE. 
On  Monday  and  Tuefday  the  17'''.  and  i^^^.  of  September,  I  Cent  Emericuf  n\t  totheCa- 
ftle,  to  liftcn  after  anfwer  of  that  Doftor  Ctirtz  his  report  to  the  Emperour ,  of  that  he  had 
Note,  the   perceived  by  me.    (But  on  Monday  Ociavius  Spinola  had  fent  into  the  Town  for  Emericitf, 
Emperour  en-  aud  told  him  that  the  Emperour  had  care  and  dcfire  to  imderftand  my  doing  with  the  Do&or  : 
clincd  toheai,  A,vJ  therefore  asked  EWfric;^-  if  I  had  been  with  the  Doftor  ,  and  he  affirmed  that  I  liad. 
^'*  Hereof  (faid  he)  the  Emperour  will  be  glad  :  And  yet  (as  I  began  to  notc)£>Mmc//if  coming 

I  riifpeft  the  on  Tuefday  in  the  face  of  the  Doftor  in  the  Kitters  ftovc  ;  had  not  one  ivord  fpoken  to 
Doaour  doth  him,  that  either  he  had  fpoken  to  the  Emperoiu',  or  he  had  not.  And  therefore  I  fitfpeli  that 
not  deal  lin-  ^j^^  Doftor  dealethnot  hoiieftly,  faithful  y,  or  wifely  in  this  fo  weighty  a  cafe._  And  foraf- 
""^^  ^*  nrch  as  he  told  me,  that  the  Emperour  his  Majefly  was  perfwaded,that  he  was  pious,e*^c.  per- 

haps he  would  be  loath  ;  now,  to  prefer  me  to  the  Ipeech  of  the  Emperour,  feeing  both  he  liim- 
fclf,  and  the  reft  of  his  counfel  flood  perfwadcd  to  the  contrary  of  this  King.  Hereupon  this 
great  delay,  upon  finifter  report  made  to  the  Emperour  might  follow,d^c. 


Note.     Frfdzy^Septemb.  21.  Circa  horaw  10.  Fere,  Mane.       t  Pragae. 

A.  As  {and  E.K.  were  together  in  my  Study,  earncftly  difcourling  of  Auricular  confef- 
lion,  publick  confedion,  and  confefling  to  God  alone,  and  of  the  Authority  of  the  Churchjand 
the  manner  of  the  fame  Authority  uling  to  releafe,  or  retain  fms,  E.  K.  i'aw  one  walk  on  tiie 
Table  between  him  and  me  :  Thereupon  I  framed  me  to  write  ,  and  note  what  fliould  be 
fliewed,  or  faid,  £.  K.  willed  me  to  fet  down  the  fliew-flone  :  So  I  did,  and  he  looked. 

£.  K.  1  fee  him  here  with  the  Scarf  over  his  head  and  facc,untill  his 
wafte,  but  I  fee  his  hair  yellow  bchindc  on  hh  hezd^d^c. 

Mitte  lucem  tuam^O  Deu-s  d?^  i>aritatem  tuam  nt  jpfA'?tos  diicant  ex 
hacvalle  miferU  ad  monism  Sa7iBnm  Sion,  &•  ad  ca'lejiia  tua  Taberna'' 
cnla.     Amen.  -  ;  ^v 

Uriel I  aw  Uriel  the  fervant  of  the  mofi  reife,  mighty,  and  everlajling  God  :  which  vijhjdft 

for  twocaufes.  ' 

The  firji,  that  I  may  tpen  unto  you  true,  and  perfect  light :  fuch  as  darkjteffe  comprehendetb  ntt, 
infallible,  and  true  meat,  the  pewer  and  fpirit  of  the  everlajiing  God. 

Ihe  fecond,that  i  may  counfel  jou  againjl   the  world,  and  teach  you  to  triumph  againfi  her  fro- 
war  dneffe.     For,  who  hathtrujled  in  the  Lord,  and  hath  been  cajl  down  .^    or  what  is  he  that  hath 
*TnnitatU  Lux  <^'^'^  aloud,  and  is  not  heard  ?  Therefore,  I  fay  UHt«  you ;  Hear  my  voyce  :  For  I  am  of  truth,  and 
sbmySleria  fer  put  agaitift  darknefTe,  and  tn  me  are  publijhed  the  light,  and  wyjieries  of  the  Irin/ty  fiem  tiWf 
VrieUmreve-    to  time,  and  in  all  ages  unto  thofe  that  fear,  and  obey  God. 

laniur  y^^  thi»gs  there  are  which  are]the  feals  and  markj  of  Satan  :  which  bring  eternal  deaih-  and 

ObA'mttum'fi'    «^'*"""'^'«'*  f*  all  fuch  as  are  notei^or  burned  with  them,  that  if  tifay  ,  lying  3  and  froward  fi- 
entium.  leme. 

Behold 


A  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  /pirits,  <5cc,      241 


'  Behold  the  words  ofChriji,mto  the  fubtUe  (joitr  father  is  a  (yar  from  the  beginmag  y  and  the 
Devil.  J 

Hearken  mto  wy  voyce  :  He  that  [i]  teacheth  falfe  BoUritte,  opetteth  [-2]  hu  mouth  tgainfi  truth- 
tr  defraudetb  [33  hia  brother  U  a  lyar^  ^ttdjhall  not  be  forgiven. 

I.     For  fir  It.,  he  fmneth  againft  his  Creator  y  which  created  all  things  in  truth. 

a.  Secondly ybeoffendeth  a gainji  the  truth ^  and  hit  Ledeemery  which  is  the  fon  of  God,  ven 
Cbrijt,  /  ,        '       ^ 

3.  thirdly,  he  offendeth  againd  th:  fpirit  of  God,  (of  the  Father,  and  the  Sou)  the  holy  Ghefl : 
wbiehfl^allmtkg  forgiven  h.4ndtherefoTidothke  incurred  the  rigour,  of  Q,:ds ptjiice  ,  his  tt email 
damnation. 

Butyl  ^ay,  give  ear  mto  my  words :  For,  I  will  fift  thediijl^  and  finde  out  the  Teatle,  that  of  n 
longtime  hath /yen  trtdden  under  the  feet.    . 

twin  come  again.  E.    K.    He  iS  gOnC 

A.  We  read  over  the  premifleSjand  fo  expefted  the  reft* 

■   E.  K.  He  is  again  here. 

•     Uriel.  -■ Now  let  lu  joynthefe  things  together. 

All  flejh  offendeth,  and  it  a  lyar.       Who,  therefore  jhall  he  faved,  or  efcafe  eternal  danmatioM  ?  obkH'o 

He.it  is  (i  fay)  that  when  be  hath  lyed^and  fpok,en  againji  the  truth  doth  not  -frowardly  drtwn'dy  Salutk.' 
mtd  keep  down  hit  fin  in  filence. 

For,  lyingmeriteth  the  vengeance  of  the  Trinity.        But  he  that  is  wilfully  froward ,  fealeth  up  Meniacium. 
bit  own  damnation  :  For  this  caufe  {jmy  brethren)  and  to  the  intent  that  the  mercies  of  God  might  Eukfis  D'gni- 
alwayes  be  ready  for  finners  ;  hath  he  provided  the  light,  and  comfort  of  his  fpirit  ,  left  as  a  con-  '"^  if  Authori. 
tinual  workman  in  the  Church  and  fpoufe  of  Chrifi.  '"'' 

J  teach  you  briefly  :  that,  he  wbofoever,  opening  bit  mouth  againji  the  fpirit  of  truth  ;  ajid  with 
tfilfull  fiowardneffe  continueth  inhit  /j/«^,  without  reconciliation  ty  the  iOhurch  fnneth  againfi  the^^'^°^"^''"''°'* 
holy  Ghojiy  and  fiiall  be  damned  eternally.  "  '^^^  Church. 

1  come  again.  E.   Jf.    He  is  gOnC. 

E.  K.  He  is  here  again. 

Uriel Be  now  therefore  a  dmonifhed  {I  fay)  he  warned  :  And  confideringyouhe  finnerSy^''tt&^ 

kjtowledge  your  offences,  leajl  in  the  end  your  fit  be  againji  the  holy  Ghojiy  and  fo  not  to  he  forgiven, 
hut  herein  they  erre  with  you  that  expound  tkr  Scripf-resy  fayingy  that  man  iinnethj  and  cannot  be 
forgiven, becaufe  he  iinneth  againft  the  hoIyGiioif. 

I  teach  you,  my  brethren  :   that  there  it  no  fin  againji  God,  but  it  it  againflr  the  holy  Ghofi:: 

Iffoif,  intheend,  ir  te>«t  Hp  w/f/^  wilhill  lilence.  WUful  fi- 

,      Wbenfeever,  (therefore)  you  have  offended  acknowledge ,  I  fay,  your  fins,  before  Cod  and  his  An-  ^"''' •    ..  .  . 

gels  :  That  God  may  forgive  you,  and  the  Angels  bear  witneffe  of  your  fergiveneffe ,  and  /hut  not  up  pxnhemu!"" 

your  fins  in  f  roward  filence.  jfyf„  Angeitcl, 

If  thou  commit  adultry,  if  thou  bUfpheme  the  name  ofGodyifth'jubealyar;yea,ifthoufpeak,^'°^^^dS,- 
Mgainli  the  truth :  yet,  if  thou  fay  there  is  no  Go  d  (as  the  *  foolijh  do)  Defpair  not ;  faying,  I  have  '/""• 
finned  againji  the  holy  Ghofiy  becavfe  I  am  a  finner,  and  a  blafphemer  of  the  name  of  Gody  becaufe  I      ' 
bavefpoken,  and  opened  my  mouth  againji  the  fpirit  of  truth ;  But  go  vwto  the  Church  ,  wki:h  if  ito  ad Er.le. 
governed  ly  the  fpirit  of  God,  and  there  with  hearty,  and  open  confefton  difclofe  yand  make  plain  Jiam,  ' 

thj  offences,  that  the  h:ly  Ghoft  may  bear  witneffe  in  the  fpoufe,  and  Church 

of  Chrtii  ;  Thttt  thou  hafi  not  finned  againji  him  to  eternal  death  :  Becaufe  A.  Voluotirv  confefHon 
thou  art  not  drowned  in  froward  filence.  Js  contrary  to  froward  fi 

Tory  although  Gcdht2iV  witneffe  of  repentance.      Although  he  hear,  end     'f"^^- 
open  hifs  ears,  yet  confider  alfo  he  hath  hands,  and  mv'i  vntye  thofe  bonds     jr/'j'"^^''  ^"Z^  ^"* 
vthcrewith  you  are  bomid.    What  nre  th.  hands  of  God  ,  but  his  fpirit,  '     '^''"'  '°^-  *"•"* 

wherewith  he  makfth  and  created  all  things.  Therefore  when  thoubaji  cried  out  and  art  forry, 
endeavour  thy  felf  alfo  to  be  lifted  up  by  the  hands  of  God. 

Learn  a  fimilitiide  in  ChrijiyWhich  ( fignifying  the  power  of  his  Church,)  commanded  the  offen- 
der to  go  and  wa(l]  himfelf :  and  fo  he  w^K  whole.  I  fpeak.thisyf or  thy  \E.K^  inllruHion  .- 1  fay  alfo 
mto  thee,  [E.K.]  Go  and  wafti  thy  felf:  For  thou  art  a  ly^ar'ythau  art  a.  drunkard  :  And  therefore 
thou  art  a  finner.  And  if  thou  perfeverey  andjhadow  thy  fins  with  wilfull  filence  frowardly  ,  then 
fe^Ufi  thou  thy  felf  with  the  fecond  brand,  and  canji  not  be  forgiveny  becaufe  tfjou  finneji  againji  the 
Gbojl. 

*  Anaiiizs  fell  dowH  at  the  feet  of  Peter  ynot  oHely  for,  that  he  lyed  :  but  becaufe  after  his  of^  *  Alt, 1. 
fence  he  was  wilfully  filent. 

Here  thou  mayeji  confider  the  greatneffe  of  God  his  myjieriesy  and  fecretjs  of  his  will  and  of  fa-  supra 
vour,  that  he  ftretcheth  out  unto  thee  in  mercy, /or  t/froH  4ft  «.ChiIdc,  and  maftafcend,  and  ' 
niuft  become  a  man.        The  reji  after  you  are  refrejlied.  * 

VA*,  \Ve  went  to  Dinner  to  bur  Hoft  his  houfe. 

-i\  i.f^;  Thanks,  honour,  glory,  and  praife  be  unto  ihc  Almighty  Trinity,  now  and  ever. 

Amen. 
•'    -"  i  A.  After 


^     t  -*     -     ■    -  ——  "  -  -       ■    .-    ■ 

z/^v     A  true %^dat'ton  of  D^  Dee  his  Anions  mthJfirttSy  &c. 


t   More  af- 


A.    After  we  had  been  at  Dinner,  they  read  over  the  preniiiTes  ,  and  confidcred  them 

.   E.  K.    Here  he  is.'  :  '^lot 

h.   BlefTed  be  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  highcft,  to  whcm  be  all  honoar  and  glory\* 

Lfriel. .....  Lo^  Lo,L'^,  Qfay)  ynhich  $f  you  hath  an  tye^  that  feeth  net ^  (now)  the  world  : Ahe 

vnitji,  and  folly  of  worldlings  :  and  fuch  at  are  choked  wiih  the  mildew  of  vanity  and  worldly  tri^X 
motion  /  :    b 

For  th'M  fayeth  the  Lord ;  wherein  could  t  pew  vty  fe!f  wore,  either  unto  this  age  ,  or  unto  this 
'E.vipsrQuri  then  with  rebuking  hiraforhis  fins  from  Heaven  ?  -sti^id 

T^ho  is  ah!e  to  proniife  more,  or  t»  perform  t  affureder  then  I^whicb  lighten,and  ma\e  all  things  ? 


^-  ft  defpifed  of  Rnd,3iii 

Curt^.  -J 

*  T 


furedly.   '    ^'^f  '*  J  believe  not, 

Tea,  they  rejoyre  in  their  own  folly,  and  defpife  me  :  yea,  becavfe  they 
defpifc  thee,  whom  I  have  fent  with  my  word  unto  them, 

E.  K. 

Well,  thus  fayeth  the  Lord,  they  have  defpifed  their  own  Garlands ,  and  have  trodden  their  food* 

mider  feet :  Ihey  have  rent  their  Rohesin  pieces,  and  have  caji  them  into  the  waves.       Tkey  are  he- 

Contra  Rud.       come  majierlijfe  Dogs,  for  I  have  jorfukjM  them.       And  to,  Rodolph,  7  will  fcatter  thylones^  atieH' 

thy  bead  fliall  be  devided  in  many  pieces.        I  wilUring  m  thy  er.emies  over  all  thy  Kingdoms  ,  aneL ' 

Contra  Cmx..    for  thy  ful{e  fl.a/l  many  thsifands  perijh.       He  alfo  that  thinkjth  himfelf  wife,  if  he  dye  a  naturid^ 

death  ;  then  fay,  I  am  not,  neither  that  I  live  with  my  people. 
_  A  f«'f  lo^i      Bnt~becaufe  thou  haji  done  that  which  I  cotmnanded  thee  ,  [and  hali  not  forgot  mj  nayne.       Xe, 
till  injunil^m     I  will  plant  thee  my  felfjand  thou  fhalt  grow,  and  out  of  thee  (hall  fpring  a  mighty  and  a  ter- 
VaSuia  mifeii-  "'^'^  fvvord  :  whofe  Wits  fliall be  M  the  Carbuncle,  and  edge  like  unto  the  fting  of  a  Dragon,«»ii 
&rdti  divins     I  ^'''^  ""f  f"ffe>"  ^hee  to  fall :  neither  fhall  thine  enemies   ride  upon  thee.        Truely,  truely, ; 
mm  A,  k.now  I  am  with  thee. 


thou  fioalt 


Sathanas.  *  Ke  magnJtudo  reve- 
velationutn  extelUr  mc,  datus  efi  mi- 
hi  iljmulus  cainis  meaf,  &c.  Faults 
ad  Corintbm  jecunda,  cap.ii. 


England  par- 
doned fot 

^.  his  fake. 


But  he  patient :  for  Satan  hmiteth  hard  after  thee.  I'hou  fljolt 
have  aiwayes  a  ^  pric\  even  unto  thy  laji  graven  But  therein  fhall 
thy  faith  he  exalted,  and  thy  reward  great, 

I  come  again, 

E.  K.  He  is  gone. 

E.  K.  Here  he  is  again. 

Uriel. ......  Lo,for  thy  labour  I  will  reward  thee  :  And  fo  it  pall  be.  Behold  ,  /had  deter- 
mined to  have  rooted  out  the  Englifii  people,  to  have  made  a  wilderneffe,  and  defart  of  it ;  to  have 
filled  it  with  many  ftrange  people,  and  to  have  tied  the  fword  to  it  perpetually. 


But 


A.  This  is  no  contradiftion, 
for  thus  this  wilderncire  and 
filling  is  to  be  underflood< 


A. 


God  will  give  me  England  ,  that  is  to  fay, 
fpire  It  from  diftruftion  for  my  fake,  &c. 
England.  A.  Our  good  return  into  Eng- 
land. A.pjrJijps,  fplders  flying  in  the  aire, 
arc  carried  by  firings  of  their  own  fpinning,or 
making,  or  el  fe  1  know  not  how.  Rui,  1  re- 
mained for  the  mod  part  in  Bohemia,  and  in 
the  Empire,  till  1^89. 


The  filling  of  it  with  ftrangers  fhoiild  have 
been  for  the  conqucft,  and  in  a  manner  ra- 
zing, or  defacing  of  all  Cities,  Towns,  and 
CafHcs,and  foto  have  brought  it  to  a  wil" 
derneffa  and  defart. 

But  Lo,Iwill  give  thee  that  land  j  ('onely  for  thy  fake)  j J 
it  fhall  not  be  confumed. 

And  after  certain  moneths ,  I  will  bring  thee  homej^ 
yea,  thoupalt  live  till  thou  be  able  to  pafTe  the  waves" 
without  a  fhip,  and  to  afcend  the  Hills,as  the  Spiders  do, 
Notwithjianding,!  will  takj^  the  Crown  fr$m  the  hovfe,  it  1 
in  ,  and  I  will  place  it,  as  I  ^.i^tf  Prophefied  unto  thee' 
Notwithjianding,  for  a  titoe,  thoujhalt  live  with  Caefar,!  ^ 

E.  K.  He  is  gone. 

A.  O  Lord,  what  fhall  become  of  my  good  friend  the  Lord  L^tskje. 

E.  K.  Here  he  is  again. 

'AL.  Uriel 0  f  Lzsky  thus  it  is  faid:  i'hou  [a.  ]  haji  groaned  for  him,  and  hajl  placed  ^  in 

A.  i.Came  to  thy  j^A.^j  heart :  From  henceforth  will  I  reconcile  him  unto  me,  and  I  willceafe  my  anger  upon  hinr, 
us  to  I  rcfeon,  and  be  Jhall  come  hither*  Jhertly.       But  he  is  a  wanton,  and  very  prone  to  fin. 
in  Bohemia,  ..,-,,       t/-  . 

An.  I j88.  fcft      EHt  hear  what  I  f.iy  unto  thee. 

mwZmfpo*  [^-  ^'  He  feemeth  to  have  talk  with  one  afar  off] 

^''•*>*''-  Caefar  thought  thoubadji  had  the  Philofophers  Jione,  and  (as yet)  ^  thinhjthfo. 

Kum.tt.  '  Even    as  I  ch«aJ{ed  the  gluttemus  Jfraelites  with  quayles  ,  fo  will  I  eboa\e  him  with    that 

i'faln.         fecret.  .,^.,.      ,     ,     .,,  1     .    .^  ^  ..•.,--•  ^»-     .  i . 


I  come  again. 


^u*  ^'i  '^'^  ^ 


A  true  B.elation  of  D'" .  Dee  his  ABions  mth  fpiritf,  <3cc,       24^ 

— ^^ — . — ' — ^ • — — •  I  -I  * 

Mfhold^  thoujha/t  vrite  unto  hint-,  fapag,  that  he  regardeth  not  heaven  : 

And  fay  unto  him,  that  thou  canft  make  the  Philpfophers  ftonc,  I  will  per-      ^  ^TT  "  ^^  '*''"'"* 
Zr      '.  ,  rr-i         /I     I     J     •  ^     I  T      ■,,     ■  I  r-    ^ .   ,      unto Cilar. 

form  It  unto  t^fi?  ;  i  how  ihzlc  do  it  :  And  I  will  ^ive  mito    thee  a   fpecial    LapUPhMnphorum. 

vcrtue  in  healing  .•  That  wbenfoever  thou  conieft  hither ;  Ihaujhalt  under'     a  fpecial  eifc  in  he»Iin» 

ftand  the  truth.  And  this  I  do,  becaufe  they  (hall  not  defpife  thee.  W  '1^=  ^^^ '» t^'s  ftone. 

A.  O  Lord, forme  to  be  defpifed  in  doing  thy  commandment  ,  is  honour  and  comfort  to 
me :  But  as  concerning  thy  honour  and  glorie  ;  Thou  in  thy  wifdom  Jvuowelt  what  is  beft  to  be 
done.  R,  Perjbir. 

Uriel NotrfiththiHdingy  thou  pal/ fee  hint  ferijh  before  thy  face.        Lo^from  thii  timet  I  will  Benediaio  Dei 

bleflc  thee  marveiloufly,  and  I  will  help  thee  in  all  thy  workj.  fnfuper  nos. 

{Do  thou  alwayes :  ,  S*prt. 

And  Yua\e  we  thy  Biickjer.  ^"  ^"• 

a.   What  fhall  I  do  with  Doftor  Curtz,  as  concerning  his  anfvver? 
Uriel Hiinile  him  lik^  a  7>ian,forhe  will  deceive  thee. 

E.  K.  I  requeft  you  but  one  thing  for  all  my  labour  and  travel  i 
tiiat  is,  that  this  Doflor  might  this  night  be  bereft  of  his  life,  to  the  ter- 
jpur  of  other,  cf^c. 

Uriel Have  patience  God  tiirneth  all  to  hit  glory^  andyovr  commodity.    To  morrow  I  have 

Something  elfe  to  fay. 

Dcus  Nofter  in  coelo,  omnia  quaecunque  voluit  fecit:Ille  folus  eft  Omnipotens,  JCternuSjfapi- 
ens,  BonuSjJuftus  &  Mifericorsrilli  debetur  omis  Laus,  gratiarum  aftio,honor  Si.  gloria.   Amen, 


Saturday,  22.  Septemb.  Manc^Circiter  hordm  9. 
Precibus  ad  Deum  finitis,  &  variis  ad  ipfi;m  E  jaculationibus  pro  L'ce  &:  vcritate  Dei,  &c. 
\  3c  quibnfdam  de  KHc/o/f^i  &:  Carrzii  corruptis  Judiciis   (qui  Dei  Mifericordias ,  juxta  cainis 
I  (enfimi  judicare  aufi  funtj  (^apparuit  Vriel  facie  velata  ut  ante.] 

Uriel For  thu  caufe  {fay  I  unto  ihee)  write  unto  Rfidolph  ,fayi)tg,  I  can  make  the  Philo-    A  Letter  to 

I  fophers  ftone  :  Becaufe  Iwottld  place  thee  with  them,  according  to  their  hope  and  imagination;  Rudolph  the 
•  %bat  whileji  they  think,  little  of  me,  and  of  the  fweetnefTe  of  my  meflage  and  teftiinony  ,   I  might  ^"'P=f°>"'' 
I  lurjiout  atmngli  them  i  as  the  mighty  waters  do   out  of  Hills^when  the  earth  moveth  :  For  Ihsveiaid^^"^!^'^'^^'^' 
unto  thee,  I  will  place  thee  here  ;  If  1  fow  thee  here,  what  Raven  can  piuc'k.  thee  up  by  the  roots,  ra  mmbnt. 
No,  I  will  hide  tbee,  (k  the  Hen  doth  her  Chickens  :  And  J  will  make  thee  fprinij  to  their  de-  upis  2h'tlofo' 
I  firnftion.  For  why,  thou  (halt  overcome  that  myftery  for  thj  own  fakj?.  fn'"' 

A,  For  the  glori.^of  God  :  his  honour  and  triumph,  all  good  come  inito  me. 

Uriel Behold, fince  they  willmt  tj'e  thee  unto  them  from  heaven  :  Thou  Jhalt  tye  them  unto 

!  tffee  from  earth  :  That  thou  mayefi  rejoyce  when  thoufeeji  their  dejiruaion  ,  and  be  ready  doithed  c^f^r  fatmAs. 
I  f^r  him  that  is  to  come. 

,Jt  WJS  faid  unto  thee,  my  mo  ther  faith fhe  will  chufe  an  Emperour  in      }' '"  \ ^^vH^^  ''^^<^"«i> !"«" 
lemeft    .-    But  tt  ii  ErneH  that  fiall  fit- Jipon  his  feat.        Behold,  there    ^  'e!1/^  FratlTZLlphu 
I  Jkall  be  no  feed  left  m  hmi-/or  hif  wicKedneJJe.     Tea  ,  the  bleffmgs  that       ^.    Bieffings  offered  are  prd- 
■  JJaavc  ottered  htm  fhall  return  agam  ;  and  I  will  leave  his  houfe  na-   mlfes  with  conditions. 
V^d.     2)«t  w^f«  he  feeth  and  hath  Gold  (which  if  the  thing  he  de-       GolA.ex  Lpide  Phlfifopbornm. 
fVfttb,  and  thofe  that  counfelhim,do  mo\i  defire  him,  for')  Thenjhallhe      ^'"'  "ni'-l'sMmbilis,  inaHcli'  » 

fcrijh  with  a  moji  cruel,  terrible,  and  unheard  of  mifchief.  "■ 

But  lo,I  have  written  his  name  within  my  hand,  becaufe  I  would  not  forget  to  put\i(l\  him.     Be-      Nocc, 
ithldy  I  could  fend  the  windes  to  devour  him,  and  could  open  the  Caves  of  the  earth  to  fwallow  him; 
which  Would  tuna  to  my  honour:  But  I  have  a  care  over  you. 
.  Now  lam  unto  you  in  mercy  and  wifdora  .  But  I  will  be  with  you  in  ter-        God  In  mercy ,  wifJom, 
iipr  tf«(i  miracles.      And  I  will  deal  with  you  in  a  higher  degree :  And  you    terror.miracles. 
\\fiall  hear  mj  voyce,  m  men  do  their  brethren.  »"«  Domm  uthomm  fu- 

A.  What  thou  wilt  (O  Lord;  for  thy  honour  and  glory :That  be.         *"'"  "'"'"  '"'^''""'' 

Uriel But  thofe  that  are  his  counfellers  have  commanded  him  ,  rather  then  counfelled  himf  confdiani  di 

tto  hare  no  dealing  with  thee /zt/i//.  fjjs, 

c  And  he  is  poffejfed  with  a  great,  and  a  mighty  Devil.    And  behold  Belzagal  (which  is  the  fury  and  R.  Poffffut 
trime  of  the  Turkj)  doth  if^'ji  him  in  his  wick^ednejfe,  for  he  k>ioweth  it  may  come  to  paff<;  that  *  his  Bel*»g»t  f"- 
f  Kingdom  pall  be  jhort.        But  give  ear  unto  me.       Fawn  thou  upon  Cxfar  as  a  worldling,  that  thou  "'^^"">"  ^'""*' 
)mayeft  draw  him  with  the  world,  to  fee  the  glory  of  God  :  but  to  his  dejiruaion.        For  lo  ,  hofo  much  ^'"j'urk'Ph  or 
»«flre  a  mans  felicity  it  in  this  world,  the  mofejhallbe  the  bnrden  of  his  deiirudion.  KadAphM  rd-^ 

There  be  that  gape  after  thy  books,  and  fpeak  vainly  of  things  that  are  not.    Therefore  I  coun-  ''''^''' 
feltbat  they  dwell  not  long  w/t/^  Poland.  My  ^^^  t 

Behold,  when  L^sky  Cometh,  bi  fmll  not  hafiiJy  return  into  Pohnd:  till  Iwbifper  inrhis  ears,^'°"^*       ' 
He  it  dead  that  fought  thy  life.        I  have  wore  to  fay,  but  they  are  not  (jc't)  neceffary.  ^-  ^' 

lit     ^»  1  befeechyou  to  tell  me  when  I  Ihall  prepare  my  felf  to  go  for  my  bookSjC^e^^ 
*■:'  UrieL....jt 


~^      J^true1{elatmo/  D^  Dee  his  jBionsmthffirtts.d^c. 


r'         7~r  ilnel         I  fpeaknot^  that  Ikmwnot ;  but  chufe  thy  own  time.  Nokp  will  Ibeceme  a  Courtier. 

I  miy  chu'c  vj  1  iti ij;"-    >,      3  V 

myt.mctoj^a         £,    J^'^    Hc    IS  gOnC. 

to  Caci».  '        Fiat  voluntas  Veiy  ad  ejm  Undent,  honorem  &  glorityn.        Ameu. 


Monday,   Septembri^^  2^.  Matte  hora  S.     t  Praga!. 
A.  \t  the  firft  \ooklns;  E.  K.  faw  t/rie/,  but  covered  with  his  Scarf,  &c.     Notwithftanding  I 
faid  Tome  prayers  to  God  on  my  knees,  and  came  and  faid  here.  Mitte  lucem  tnam  &  veritatem 
tuamODeiu:    ut  ipfx  noi  diKavt  ad  mottteyv  Sicn,  Sec     ,        ,     ^,         .  ,  , 

It  is  to  he  remembred  that  for  two  caufes  we  repaired  to  the  Shew-ftone  :  the  one  by  rea- 
fon  of  the  letter  which  I  had  written  to  the  Empcrcur  :  and  was  nnndcd  to  go  to  /hew  it  to 
the  Suanifh  Embaffadour  before  I  fent  it  t  o  the  Enpcroiir,  to  have  hi>  opunon  of  it,  and  alfo 
to  bear  it  Seco.idly,by  reafonof  foul  flanderous  wordswhich  were  fpoken  of  mc  hcreat  this 
EmbafTadours  Table  :  That  I  was  a  Conjurer,  and  a  bankrupt  alkimift,  and  came  here  to  get 
fomewhat  of  the  Emperour  :  and  that  I  had  Ibid  my  goods,  and  given  to  tlie  Lord  Li^k'f  the 
inony,and  that  he  had  deceived  me.  To  thefe  uncmths  the  Embaffadour  did  reply  in  my 
behalf :  for  which  I  meant  to  thank  him,  ^«^c. 

[li\c\.  Even  as    the  accurfed,and  caji  dow;t,mofi  ffilfully  abhorreth^hatethyiDtd  dilhomw 

eth   the  Cod  of  Ju\HceJbecajtfe  of  his  wightinefs  and  power  over  him  :    So  do  all  thofe  that  fwk^  and 

hang  upon  his  dugs,that  are  covetecus  and  dejiroiis  of  worldly  promotion  :    that  gape  and  thirji  after 

the  glory  of  this  world,  ahhor,  hate,  and  continually  vex  and  diJhonour,fuch  as  lovejujlice^  or  dwell 

under  the  wings  of  the  God  of  power  and  Triumph.     Herein  may  you  rejoyce,  that  you  arepartakjtrs 

and  innocents  (^railed  aty  and  defpifedwith  the  world)   in  thefellowjhipofCod^  and  of  h»  Son 

Chriii.    Herein  may  you  be  glad/hat  you  are  fealed,  and  dwell  with  the  Fathers,  and  that  you  flaj 

r-  t-ir^  Vivi  alfo  upon  the  Harpc  of  David  ;  for  verily  as  thej  are,fo  Jhallyou  be  ;   and  as  they  are  made  rightt^ 

dl  OVA  by  reafon  of  their  elsaion,  and  crowned  toward  eternal  Joy;     So  Jhall  y.ur  Ehdion  ejiabljflt 

EelHo.  your  righteonfneffe,  and  giveyou  Garlands  of  eternal  comfort.     Thofe  that  are  oh    the  Seas,  are 

fearful  if  the  windes  :  And  why  /  becauCe  ef  the  motion  of  the  place,  and  of  the  power  of  nature  : 

But  it  M  HOtfo,  TfithyoH  :  for  you  dwell  in  Cajiles  made  ef  marble,,  wrought  out  of  the  middefi  of  a 

v'ens  habitat  in  fure  rocki  <>■  ^"oji  Ji^l'le  foundation.    For  why  ?  I  am  fure  that  Goddwelleth  in  you,  aitd  you  in  him. 

t»bis  h  i>"  i»  Therefore  lift  up  your  heads,  and  rejoyce  vhenyou  are  afflidedy^m.  keep  the  image  of  Sod  finccre 

lief.  and  nerfeft  in  vou,  that  you  may  alwayes  be  *  merciful  in  the  Image  of  bit  Son  Chri^.  But  when  the 


fffum  fnpri  in  ^,,„rg^j  ;  Comfort  of  ■\  wifdom  and  power,  I  am  mindful  of  yon,and  will  be  mindful  of  my  ^  prf 
ml>hUas.  ^^  J  toward  you.  And  If  you  remain  and  ^wf //[  forte  [  together']  deed  ]  and  be  conjiant  in  me^ 
t  Sim's'.  you  (hall  paffe  the  t  Thunders  that  are  to  come^you  ftiall  be  witnelfes  of  my  power :  and  (hall  enter 
*  VSet.  into  the  *  Land  of  Fromife  with  thofe  thatjhallbe  comforted:  where  thefe  dayes  fliallhavc  an  end, 
t  Sufkntiacm  q  ^^^  by-^thren,  thii  world  exceedeth  in  wickjdnejfe,  and  is  a  terrour  to  the  good  Angels  :  Becavfe 
foientu.  of  the  fouls  th^tjhe  devoureth.     But  when  Ughtneffe  is  rewarded,  and  Juliice  fittetb  in  place.    Then 

t  rl'mtmav^n-jhalljhe  hear  no  weight,  but  be  made  all  one  with  the  bottomleffe  fit.  Deff/fe  her,  defpife  her  j  for 
twa.  jheis  au  Harlot, 

'  Terra p>o:nif-  ^  .^^  ^^.  ^^^^^  ^^^.  ^^  Behold  I  have  entred  in  amongfi  you  ;  and  it  is  my  Spirit  that 
'"""''  Damini  Magnifco  D^miro  Gutielmt    leadetb    to    the    Embafladour  from    Spain.      I   will    reward 

ieSitnlhCUmente,HiffaniiirvmKc-     him. 

g„  UgaK  bee  4pmremiK  (ni  mine-         Therefore  as  thou  hajl  opened  me  unto  the  *  v>ickfd,fc  let  alfo  the 

f^^Ufif  T-he  Lord  is  become  a  firebrand  tn  jury,  and  hath  armed  htm' 

felf  :  and  hath  takjn  wtto  him  his  great  Target,  and  the  Spear  «f 
l/is  indignation  '•    Accurfed  are  they  that  have  offended  him. 

Turn  vero  sterni  Genii  Imniortalis 
£^.  JgiKHfiim  memini  in  SibylU  ►[!«*  &  •  «fo^K.\.    URIEL,  Saniel,  Araelque, 

oraculit  Gmcis  &  Latims  factUs  Quas  mala  quifqne  hominiim  patraverit  ante  Scienccs 

VruutiZ  iuJ,ui  coiUll.ni.nt  E tetns  an.mas  tenebr.s caligini. omnes. 

hmmes  ad  JHdimm.  Vide  i(y  htc  Judicio  hitent  ad  formidabilepatns 

aicfibe.  Magni,  Immortalis  folmm,  &c. 

Orar.  Sibyl,  pag.  jp. 
Ubi  fequuntur  pliira  dc  V  K  I  F  L  E. 

And  when  I  feparate  them  in  the  day  of  wrath  to  come,  (  as  one  of  the  finders  and  gatherers 
in  of  the  harveli  of  God  )  Then  they  (hall  know  that  1  am  URIEL,  -Khich  will  not  forget  ihi 
mek^dneffe  of  their  bands j  nor  their  blafphemous  mouth,  in  that  day  of  revenge.  ! 

Aftd 


^^  true  Relation  of  D^ .  Dee  his  Acltons  mth  fpirits,  dec  24^ 


/tfter  a.  certain  time  conidth  Michael  twto  jouy  and  (hall  (kew  unto  jiu  h's  bloody  Sword ;  attdi'rapbeU.t  Je 
jcujkal! iiard  under  his  B-'nittr-     Hefljdllho'dup  huh  rndi  ,  a>jd  i%a!t  fight  as.ai>t\T  the  Hills  for  ^^(^^AELS. 
you  :  and  your  enemies  Jha II  not  he.  Unto  which  time,  receive  jou  Light  and  Comfort  :  and  be  cok- 
tentedwith  udverfity  in  the  Lord.  «  Math. cap.  y. 

My  brethren,  it  is  better  to  be  poor,  with  thofe  that  are  "^  oooi-  in  fpirit :    then  to  be  rich  with^''""^'"'!'!''- 
thofe  that  are  gluttons,  and  with  the  Princes  nf  the  Earth  '  '"xlJum^'fyT 

Tboujhaltie  with  Cxfafj  in  deffite  of  the  Devil.  A  Eh  (nm 

r  L         r    J  Cjtf't'-e. 

Ihavejaid.  I  underftand 

A.   Gloria  patri  8c  filio&  Spiriciii  Sanfto  :    Sicut  eratin  Principio  SC  nunc  Sc  fcmper,  &  in  "°' tli««.  Iww  ic 

f€cula  feculorum.     Amen.  's  or  (hail  be 

v;ritiid ,    or 
wiih  which 
Cjfar. 


Note:  Asl  had  finilliedthis  Aftion,  and  was  come  to  my  Study  door;  Emerirus  vizs  re- 
turned a;-;;ain  from  the  Spaiiifh  Embtiradour,  to  whom  I  had  fenc  him  defirous  to  knovv  his 
leafurc  for  me  ;  who  had  now  fent  me  word  by  Emericus  to  come  to  diner,&:  fohe  would  have 
leafure,  &r.  Whereof !  was  right  glad  ;  and  went  thither  to  diner:  who  into  his  inermoft 
Jtudy  (  where  he  himfclf  was  writing  of  letters  )  caufed  me  to  be  brought.  And  after  I  had 
complained  of  injury  and  violence  done  unto  me,  by  foul  Ilanders,  and  that,  at  his  Honours 
Table  :  (  to  which  his  Honour,  in  my  behalf  had  replied  :  and  therefore  moft  humbly,  and 
lincerely  I  did  thank  him)  I  faidthat  theEmperous  Majefty  himfclf  could  bear  me  witnefTe, 
that  I  nfed  this  phrafe  unco  him5thac  I  came  not  for  his  riches  zs^Non  verti  ad  vos  0  Sereniffime 
Ctefar  propter  divitiasveiiras,nt  inde  ego  dives  fierem,  fed  a  D:'o  mfjf:ii,  non  audeo  aliter  facere 
(Ottame^Hf  ad  ve'iram  Cjefaream  Majeliatemvoluntatem  declarare.  Sic.  And  therefore  ,  How 
falfly  they  flandered  me,  it  was  evident  :  and  becaufs  I  perceive  tiiac  Doftor  Curtz  hath  noc 
dealtneither  with  due  entertainment  of  me  as  of  allranger,  or  a  Sudent,or  a  Marhematician, 
or  of  one  whom  ( to  my  fdce  )  he  gave  great  praife  unro,  di  of  one  long  (ince  of  great  fanle  iii 
Germany,  and  fo  in  his  good  eftimation,  &c.  And  leaft  of  all,  as  of  one,  who  offered  fo  greac 
curtefies  to  the  Emperours  Majefty  as  he  was  made  wicneile  of:  I  thought  good  to  lend  umo 
the  Emperours  Ma  jefty  this  letter  following,  and  fo  read  it  unco  him  after  diner,  when  I 
(hewed  him  Librum  Prugenfemfive  C^fareum  ;  and  moreover  Litrirn  decimi'n,  (  whole  former 
title  was  Ltbri  Sexti  Myiici'Tertiarisis  )  and  there  (hewed  iiim  divers  Aftions  in  Lartne  al- 
ready tranflated,  becaufenow  to  tranQate  fo  to  him  of  the  Ea^jlifh,  did  Icem  toiiieboch  te- 
dious, and  to  him  not  fo  readily  pleafant.  All  things  on  his  puL  considered,  'ii>  fummar/ 
final  concluiion  was,  as  well  of  the  laft  offer  in  this  my  letcer,  as  of  the  great  aftions  and  di- 
vine purpofes.  For  the  firft  he  declared  that  he  was  lineally  defcended  out  of  the  confaii- 
'gu'mitY,ofoHe  a  GentlemaH,b!4t  unlettred  at  the  firiy  woo  left  ha  wife,  chi'dret,  '^'''^/'^''''''^ '^D,;„;„;  r„^,j 
Maiorca,  dnd  .rfcended  *n  Hill  there,  and  in  plase  fa'itayy  remmined  an  while  year,  and  at  the  ^^.^^^  Hijpinia' 
iears  end,  be  came  down,  but  fo  learned  and  wife,  that  all  who  knew  him  before,  wondred  at  ic.  mm  Rijiinlnm, 
And  that  the  fame  man  was  called  K<zj'>ij«<faL'-*//ia  :  ani  tnac  he  m.iie  that  which  is  called 
chePhilofophers  Stone,  as  in  England  (  faid  he  )  I  underftand  is  gojd  record  of  ic  :  Therefore 
I  fee,  quoth  he,  that  it  is  a  truth  and  poTible  :  and  as  he  hath  granted  the  knowledge  of  ic  to 
one  man,  fo  he  may  grant  it  to  another,  &c.  And  as  for  the  other  higher  matters,  /  perceive 
that  God  intendethfome  great  matter  in  thit  world.  But  I  am  ror  able  to  judge  or  deccrniine 
of  it  :  But  I  am  ofthis mind,  wherein  I  can  any  vtay  further  the  (ervice  of  God,  1  will  be 
ready  and  obedient,  &c.  And  as  for  the  Emperours  perfon  himfelf,  I  find  him  of  a  good  na- 
ture, curteous,  and  moft  zealouQy  Catholick  :  yea  ready  to  (hed  his  blood  in  the  caufe,  if 
opportunity  required.  He  underftandcth  the  Latine  well,  and  fpeaketh  fufficiently  well  : 
"That  is  true  (quoth  I)  for  he  fpake  well  in  Latine  to  me  divers  things  Moreover  (  faid 
he)  as  soncerning  yoii,I  faw  him  very  well  affeUiomited  ,  mtikjng  great  account  of  your  book,,  &c. 
Therefore  you  aie  noc  to  regard  chefe  Dutch  mens  ill  tsngues,  who  hardly  can  brook^  any 
fir  anger,  &c. 

Upon  farther  matter  that  I  had  to  fliew  him,  I  offered  my  ready  repair  itnto  him  at  all 
times  of  his  good  leafure  being  called  or  warned.  And  he  delirous  to  fee  rheStoii£  brought 
to  me  by  an  Angel,  willed  me  to  come  to  morrow  alfo,  to  Diner  :  I  promifed  him,  and  fo 
with  thanks  yielded  to  his  honour,  I  departed  toward  my  Lodging  ac  Zethelem  in  old 
frage. 


[ii]  thk 


z/\6      A  true %clatm  of  D^  Dee  h'n  Actons  nith/firits,  6c c. 


the  Copy  of  the  forefaid  Letter  to  the  Eniperour. 

llltis  (  O  SerenifTime  Csefar  )  &  perniagnis  (  fere  omnium  )  Creaturanim  Dei ,  imm6 
itHius  Dei,  &  coeleftibus  hand  paucis  myfteriis,  arcanifqiie,  veftras  C«farex  Majeftaris 
juiriipernie(  jam,  ante  quatuordecimdies  )  fideliter,  iincciej&  diligenrer(  quantum 
fex  hovarum  fieri  poterat  fpacio  )  declaratis,   ac  manifertatls^  eidem,  cui,  eadem  penesme 
videnda,  audienda,  intellir,endaque  eife  volniftis  :   Inde,  nunc,  quje   lie  vcftra  Cjefare.x  Ma- 
jeilaii,  limplex  (tanquam  ab  aequo  rerum  y^ftimatore)  fafta  rclacio  :  vcl,  quod  aim  relatione 
adjunftumJudicTum  :  vel,  qnalis  rotius  procefRis  excogitata  cenlura  :  vel,qualis  mecxini  pro- 
cedendi,  vobis  perfuafa  cautio;   vel,  quale  pro  Cxfarei  veih'i  refponfi  forma,  initumcaptum- 
queconiilium,,Nonfumtam  immodeftccuriofus,  ut  cxpifcar,     Ncque  aliter,   vel  alia  ratione 
de  facras  veftrse  MajeftatisCsfarese  prndenti&  gratiofa  (inprsemiifis  )  Refolutione,  fumfol- 
Ijeicus,  qu.im,  me(  fidckm,  fincerum,  &  devotum  )  Dei  Omnipotentis,  &  (  in  Deo,  propter- 
que  Jeuni  ;  veftr.J:  facr.e  Cxfare;f  Majeftatis  fervitorem  deceat.     Video  ramen  mts  (  dum 
nullnni  adhut  ad  prjemifTa  receperim  refpoiifura  )  per  tarn  alci  (ilentii  (  quafi  )  ftimulum,  ali- 
q\iantMUimimpeUi,uc  fecund u  veftram  Crfaream  Majeftatemadmontim,Nc  div'niam  banc,  & 
di\inirus  oblatam  Mifcricordiam,  taminexpeftatam,  tam  magnam,    lam  inaiiditam,  tarn  ad- 
mirandam,  rainnnikipr.Ltm,  tam  ftatui  Imperatorio,  Chriftianaeque  Reipublic.c  neceffariam, 
tarn  cerram,  tam  paratam,  canique  (  per  Dei  Omnipotentis,  C  I'faresque  Majeftatis  veltr^,  ii- 
delem  fervitorem  )  re  ipfa,  vo.jis  confirmandam,  &  adnfinilbandam  :   (  fi  facra  veftra  Caefa- 
rea   Majeftas  voluiifet  )  parvimomentinegotium,  vel  inventum  aliquod  Iiumanura,   autfrau- 
dem  Diabolicam,  efle,  f'liiie,  vel  fore,  ullo  modo  fnfpicemini,  vel  Ciedatis.     Tali  enim&tara 
gravi  veftr>«  C  efare.E  Ma/elfatis  errore,  Omnipoceiitis  Dei  incendi  polTe  furorem  vehementer 
vereor  :  &  ne  hanc  Dei  mitericordiam  refpuentes,  ejnfdem  indignancem  provocetis  vindiftam, 
valde  mecuo.    Qiiapropter,  cum  videa  n  C  .lum  ipfuni  ,  &  c<eleftia  talia  mylteria  ,  non  tali 
tanta:que  curi,  veilr.E  facrs  Majeftaci  Ctfares  adhuc  elFe,  quali,   quant^tque  optaffem  equi- 
dem  :   Ego  potiusquam,  ut,  vel  Deus  huiiis  fui-  (  prius  inaudic*  )  Mifericordis  ultroqufi 
veftrx   Csefarc.t:  Majeiraci  oblate, prorfu^  Duikni  (  penes  homines  )  haberec    confpiamm  ju- 
dicium, argumentum,  Teftimonium  vel  expeiiniintuoi :    Et  potius  quam  mea  (f;epe  nominata) 
fid*elifas,  finceritas,  8iDevotio(  (ivevotum  )  erga  D.um  &   veftram   C^efarcam   Majcuatem, 
onini(  apud  pofterosnoftroi  )  careret  fide,  &  veriratis  manifeftae  robore  :   In   Dei   Nonime, 
&  ad  ejus  laudem,  honorem,  &  sloriara  :  &  ut  veftrr  fereniillmf  Cafare.t  Majeftatis  fadsfa- 
ciam  deliderioHcroico,  De  lapideilloBenedifto  :    (  Philofophorum  vocato     lapide  )    infal- 
libilicer  videndo,  poiiidendo  &  utendo :  Affero  veftre  facre  Cefareie  Majeftati,  lapideni  euil- 
demme(  auxilio  favoreque  Divino  )  conficere  pofTe.    Etpropterea;    Si  veftra  Cxfarea  Ma- 
jeftas,  me  velit  interim,  :;bi  intime  charum  habere  .-    Et,  li,  pro  dignitate  tanti  mjfterii,  & 
Beneficii  (  fibi  .i  me  liberaliilime  &  humillime  exhibendi  )  graiiofe  me  traftare  dignabitur 
(  Non  tamen  alio  quidem  velaltiori  me  iniigniens  Titulo  quam  qui  veftrs  Csfarer  Majefta- 
tis Phiiofoptio  '6c  Matheinatico  c(5fiveniat,  )  Hiis  Uteris  ore  &  corde  polHceor,    fanft^qile  coram 
Deo  Ornnipotenti  voveo :   Opus  illud  philofophicum  ,  Omuibus  fuis  mimeris  perfeftum,  in 
manus  vei'cras  Gsfareas,  Q  8c  'ine  fumptibus  veftris  a  \  illud  opus  pcrficiendura  require ndis  ) 
ac  brevilTIino,  quo  fieri  poterir,  tempore (  Nutu Dei)  medaturum.  De  aliis  pr.j.terea  Arcanis, 
adhuc  mihi  filenJum  e'ie  video.    Nunc  autem  facr;t  ^Jafarea.  Majeftatis  veftrse  gratiofam,  li- 
bera.-n,  conftintemque  volunratem,  in  pra2milTis,non  aliter,   nifi  ex  veftroproprio  gratiofo  ore 
vel  ex  veftris  Csfareis  literis  propriis,  intelligere  Cupio.     Nullum   enim  jam  nofco,  dignura 
&  aptum,  qui  in  iftis,  aliifque  Nature  &  Artis fecretis,  meus  (  penes  veftram  Csfaream  Ma- 
jeftatcm  )  fieri  deberet  Mcrcurius. 


Taefdaj,    Seftewbrii   25.     Prag?. 
JVofe  :  I  wenttoDiner  to  the  Spanifti   Embalfadour  :    and  carry ed  with    me  the   Stone 
brought  me  by  an  x'\ngel  j  -and  the  fourth  Book,  wherein  the  manner  of  the  bringing  of  it  i; 
cxprelTed.    And  alfo  1  carried  with  me  Librum  Sextuin  SunSrim  MjiHcu-m. 

Aft«r  Diner,  when  I  had  fliewed  him  thefe  things  :  his  final  anlwer  was  ,  that  verily  he 
took  the  doing  to  be  by  good  Angel  :  marry,  the  matters  to  be  too^reat :  Therefore  (faid  I") 
they  are  for  the  fervice  of  God,  and  not  bnelj  man.  Bt  fa'.d  he  was  a  finner,  and  not  wor- 
thy to  be  privy,  much  leife  to  be  a  doer  in  them  :  Notwithftanding  whatfoever  he  can  do 
ACopyof  the '^^^'■"'^^"^P^^'^'^o^^'Jj'^^  would  be  moft  obedient  therero.  He  defired  a  Copy  of  the 
letters  defired,  Eniperour  his  forefaid  letters,  tliat  he  might  confider  circumlpeaiy  of  the  Contents  before  he 
fliould  deliver  thenij  whereunto  I  confcnted.  Reuderiug  his^ honour  thanks  1  de- 
parted. ^C  -n    -.  ■  ■T\  OJl-"'~>i'' 

After 


A  true  Relation  of  I>.  Dee  his  JBicns  mth  fpirits,  (5cc.      24  ^ 


e- 


After  my  return  home,  I  found  E.  K.  refolved  to  go  from  hence  to  morrow,  for  his  wife,  r  ^  p     i 
and  fo  Itraighcway  into    England:   which  was  to   me  a    grief:     But  what  can   I   do,   ^y^<:  ^o  imo\V.^ 
refer  all  to  the  mercies  of  GoJ,  whom  I  have  called  upon  for  wifdom  to.ferve  him  withal  >    ]  UnJi%  hepr 
hive  put  my  trult  in  the  Lord,  I   have   not  murmured  at  any  Inch  pangs    and   tentations  tended. 
hitherto. 

The  mercies  of  the  Highefl:  be  upon  me,  as  I  have  put  my  truft  in  hiu). 

AmcK. 

Now  were  we  (  all  )  brought  to  great  penury  :  not  able  without  tiie  Lord  Laskjes^  or  fome     Poverty, 
heavenly  help,  to  (iiilain  our  ilate  any  longer. 

Befidesthis,  I  underftoodof  theQljeensdifpIeafure  for  my  departure,  and  of  the  Bi  (hop 
of  L5«'io«  his  intent  to  have  begun  to  nave  accufsd  m:  of  Gonjuratioii ,  and  fo  to  have  had 
the  fecret  alTilbmce  of  you  know  whom. 

Titi  es Dens  fortitudo  mea,  refugiumntetim  Sttfceptor  meuSi&  liberator  mens. 

Amen. 


■    Wedcnfday,  Septemhrii  26.   Ante  Meridiem.     Prag^. 

About  10  and  a  half  of  the  clock,  Dr,  Cartzfent  with  Mr.  Sittion  Hageck^  his  fervant  to    ^•^'"'K. 
know  my  lodging  :    He  had  paflTed  not  far  off  in  a  lane  on  horfeback  his  felf  going  into  the 
Town,  and  fo  met  Mr.  Stmen  Hagecl{,  at  the  lanes  end,  &c. 


Thurfday,  Septembris  27.      t  Pragae. 

Mane  :•  About  7.  of  the  clock  came  Dr.  Cnrtz  his  fervant  from  his  Mafler  to  tell  me, 
that  his  Mailer  would  come  unto  me  at  9  of  the  c'ock.  ^'  ^'<"'^* 

At  p  of  the  clock  came  Dr.  Ctrtzon  horfeback  to  me,  to  my  lodging  (at  Doftor  Hagec^ 
hishoufe  by  BftWeew  )  my  wifehe  faluted,  and  little  IC^f^rfwzf,  my  daughter.  Mv.  Kei/y 
had  gotten  him  into  his  chamber,  not  willing  to  be  feen. 

After  he  was  come  up  into  my  little  Study,  and  there  fet,  in  Mr.  Ke/(y  his  ufual  place,  and 
I  in  mine  ;  I  began  to  complain  of  the  great  injury  done  unto  me  here ;  for  I  came  as  a  fin- 
cere  and  faithful  fervitour  of  the  Emperour  his  Majefty,  intending  all  goodnefle  and  honour 
unto  him  :  no  hindrance,  loflc  or  hurt ;  neither  came  I  propter  div/tias  C£faris  mihi  coUigen- 
daSf  as  Ifaid  expreffely  unto  his  Majefty.  I  was,  before  1  came  hither,  of  good  name  and 
fame,  both  in  this  Court,and  all  Europe  over.  As  you  your  felf  Mr.  Doftor  ;  quoch  I  )  can  bear 
me  witneffe  :  and  other  in  this  Court  divers  :  And  that  here  my  namtand  fame  (hould  fuf- 
fer  fhipwrack,  where  I  thought  I  had  been  in,  a  fure  Haven  of  my  principal  Patrone  :  My 
thinketh  that  great  in  jury  is  done  luito  me  :  I  know  no  means  how  to  help  it,  but  to  give 
you  warning  of  the  envious  malitious  backbiters  that  alfo  are  about  this  Court,  that  as  you 
find  occafion,  you  might  encounter'with  this  evil,  and  foul  monfter,  in  fo  mighty  a  Princes 
Caufe  intruding  it  felf. 

The  Doftor  feemed  not  to  know  what  I  meant,  I  told  him,  that  at  a  Noble-mans  Table^ 
There  was,  of  great  account,who  faid,  that  there  was  an  Englijh  m.ui,come  to  the  Emperours, 
A  hankjrupt  Alchimijiy  a  Conjurer,  and  Necromantiji :  who  had  fold  his  own  goods,,  and  g'ven  the 
Lord  Laskie  the  money  :  and  that  hehad  beguiled  him  :  and  that  now  he  would  fain  get  fonts  of 
the  Emper our  his  money  front  him,  ?:cc.  The  Doftor  feemed  greatly  to  milltke  thefe  llanderous 
words,  and  faid,  that  he  never  heard  of  any  Inch  ;  with  fome  few  words  more,  of  the  wicked 
manner  of  backbiters. 

,  After  this,  as  concerning  the  report  making  to  the  Emperour,  of  that  I  had  fhewed  unto 
liim,  at  his  houfe,  (as  before  is  noted  )  he  faid  that  he  had  made  a  plain  and  lincere  report. 
Whereuntothe  Emperours  Majefty,  had  (  as  yet  )  given  no  anfiver.     .And    to  be  plain  with 

fou  (  faid  he)  his  Majefty  thinketh  them  almoft  either  incVedible,  or  impoilible  :  and  would 
ave  fome  leafure  to  coniider  of  them  :  and  is  defirous  to  have  ilie  fight  of  thofe  Latine  A- 
^Uiens you  Jhevoed  wf, or  a  Copy  of  them,  and  efpecially,  of  that,  wliich  containeth  a  para" 
■  fhrafis  of  the  Apolh/icai  Creed.  I  anfwered,  that  my  Books  I  would  not  deliver  out  of  my 
glands:  And  as  for  a  Copy  of  them,  I  would  (atleaCure)  write  it,  that  his  Majefty  might 
pave  it.  And  then  I  told  him  farther,  that  becaufe  it  was  fo  long  before  I  heard  any  word  of 
nim,  I  had  letters  ready  to  fend  to  the  Emperours  Majefty,to  have  farther  declared  my  mind 
unto  him,  and  I  declared  unto  him  the  tenor  of  them  :  and  he  told  me  that  about  three  of  the 
clockafcer  noon,  his  man  ftionld  go  to  the  Court,  and  if  then   1  would  fend  them,  his  man 

[  i  i  2  ]  fliould 


^T^^       J^true'P^e latino/  D'.  Dttkis  jBions'withJfmtSyS^c, 


fhou\d  cany  them. 

h"  ■ 

Boo 

If   . 
that 


that  if :  had  another  i^opy,  1  woina  give  ic  nun  ,  uul  i  ua.»  .u..^  v.l....  ^...  ..,»..  >  ...v"^^ 
himairothe?rc&^'/f<»»<tr<z  Afhorillkn  it  pi'tanxiorihiv  qv.ihu\i(im  Nitura  virtuUbits,  vihich  he 
had  never  feen  before.  After  this,  with  mutual  cnrtelies  offered  on  both  parts  (after  the 
manner  of  the  world  )  he  took  his  horfe,  and  returned  homeward. 


Friday,   Septemhris,  2S.     Pragx. 
Intending  to  fend  the  Emperours  letter  (  here  before  written  )  to  his  Ma  jefty  ,  by  my  good 
friend,  the  Spanifn  EmoaOadour,  I  wrote  this  letter  to  fend  to  the  Embalfadour  in  tliat  be- 
half, and  as  concerning  the  credit  of  thefe  Aftions. 

Illujirijfrmo  Domino,  Domino  Don  Gulielnio  df  Sancio  C'eviente,fere>tiftmi 
atque  Catkolici  Hifpaniarum  Kegis  afud[acrarn  Crfaream  M*- 
jelietemjSi.c.  Legato,  Tomino  fvo  obfervandijjimo. 


Jlluftris  &  MagninceHeros :  Mukis  hoc  probari  poteft  tcftimcniis  Si  c^emplis  ,  quod  ilia. 


crenuntur  a  pluri  ub  :  Aftqualis,  in  noftris,  (ii  reft*  pi^que  inforniat??  roltris  adhibeatur 
iudicimn)  effe  poteft  fufpitio  ?   Nam  a  Deo  Omnipocente,  per  mukos  jam  annos,  ridcliter,  ar- 
dentei-,  8^cor.ftanter  per  prcces  jequilitafapientia  :  Una  (Tciiicet  qus:  pene-  nos  quidem)  vi- 
detur  effe  radix  8c  occaiio  tanti  iftiui  Doni  obtinendi.     Aft  in  cce'efti  luo  Pa!a:io-,ante  condi- 
tuln  mundiim,  deterroinata,  &  alljgnata  erga  nos  Mifericordia  &  gratia  Omnipotentis  Dei, 
prxcipuum,  folidum,  immobileque  hujus  tanti  ni)  fterii  eft  cenfendum  fundamentum  :  In  quo 
ruyfterio,  talis  relucet,  per  pctentes  fidelefque  Angelos  Ifagogica  kiformatio,   De  Arcanis  Dei 
coniiliis  tarn  in  mundi  creatione  Creaturarumque  naniris,  &c  veroufu,  quam  in  mundi  pr^- 
fcjitis  moxque  frturi  ftatu  :  Etpreterea,  de  Knius  CathoHcae  Ecclelix  i^charidimoe  Jefu  Chri- 
ftifpoif",  noftr.eq'.e  pi^  matris)  fanfticatCjdignicare,  &  Authoricate  (  vekui  in  qua  etiam 
eft  Sanctorum  Communio,  &  Peccatorura  reraiilio  )  &  de  mukis  nondi:m  per  nos  revelandis 
Dei  Arcanis  Magnalibus  &  Determinationibus  :  Quod  tantimi  abeft,  ut  aliquis  (fans  mentis) 
Chriftianuf,  Aftiones  Noikas  Myfticac,  Diabolicas  elFe  frandes,  contendere  ,  immo  ne  fufpica- 
ri  quidtnj  coneair  aut  pollit:  at  porius ,  tale  Arcanum  Dei  propofitum  ,incredibiliter  admi- 
ran,  raxionem  humanam,  in  cifdem  examinandis  .  fubjugare,  &  Dei  erga  Ekftos  fuos  admi- 
randam  mifericordiam  m  iftis  elTe  manifeftam,  humillime,  &  cum  fummo  tremore  fateri  velit  ; 
E"0  quidem  ,  hafttnus, in  iftis  ,  aliud  (feie)  nihil,  me  effe  invenio,  nils  Calamura  fcvibi, 
velociter  per  me  frribentis.    Nam  vifa  auditaque  (in  mea  prsfentia)  fideliUime,  de  litera  in- 
terdum  ad  litcrar..,  interdum,  verbatim,  interdum  pluribus  fimul  receptis  verbis  (ipfo  eodem 
temporis  momentoj  quo  traduntur)  annotare  fum  folitus.    Aft  jam  in  quammuka  excrevic 
Nofter  talis  labor  volumina  ?  Ex  qu'bus  omnibus  ilium  fruftum  ,  fucceffumq  e  cxpcftamus, 
qualem  prshxit  UlejCUJus  nutui  cunfta  obediunt.!fta>  autem  ad  fuam  facrem  C£[areavt  Maje- 
ftatcm  literas  meas  :  Cum  vcftra  magniticentia  opportunitatem  inveniet  primam,  li  meo  nomi- 
ne: humiltime  eidera  ^hibere  dignabitur  ,   Tum  magno  mihi  (Diviritus)  injunfto,  levatus 
ero  onere  •.  Tum  ma^no,  a  veftra  magnificencia  atfeftus  benchtio  :  Interim  vero  ,  Dum  fu.e  fa- 
cta Majeftatis  C<eprf^  ad  iftas  refponfum  dabitur,  (nimuum  fi  ad  14.  vel  16.  dies  prius   ex- 
peftanuum  efl"et)  vel,  ftatim  poftacccptum  reiponfr.m  (li  tam  expedice  illud  recipere  pofflsm, 
qu.m  quod  leccpi  ultimo j  ad  iter  me  accingerc  dcbeo,  propter  familiam  ,  iibros  ,  8c  aliquam 
meam  fvppelleftilem,  hue  (ante  hyemis  afperitatcra}  transfer cndam.     LIbi  .  cwmCaf.-.rea  Ma- 
ieftatis  gratiofo  favore,  8c  fub  ipinisProteftionc  Jmperatoria  ,  voluntatem  Omn  potentis  Dei 
implcre,  pro  viribus,  8c  fvisfacrs  C-^Urf*;  Majeftati  infervire  (tancjuam  ejufdcm  Pjt//c/o/i^«f  C" 
Mithematicus)  fideliffime,  d«  tempore  in  tcmpus,  paratiis  cfl"e  potero. 


Illnjlri  vejir£  Magnificent-it 
AddiGijJtmns 

Joannes  Dee, 

I  an- 


J  true  Relation  of  D^  Dee  his  JBtons  mth  fpirits,  6c c.      22j  9 


I  annexed  hereunto  a  Poft-fcripr,  which  followeth  : 

roli-f:riptum. 

MEaruni  efTc  partium  ,  &  confultum  efle  duxi  veftras  Magnificentiae  paucifUmis  verbis 
fignihcare  ,  quodheri,  mane,  hora  nona,  viregregius,  &  fnx  Ma jeftis  C.eprf:e  fi- 
dus  Corifiliariis  D.  Doftov  Curtziiu,  me  humani/Time  invifebac  in  nieo  ergaftulo  ,  8c  hy- 
pocauftato ,  jtixta  Bethlehem  ,  ubi  videre  poterac  BiLlIiorhecam  pipfentem  nieam  ,  nullam 
(fere)  alianiefl'e,  prxter  Sanfta  Pei  Evangelia  &  Biblia  facra  ipfofque  noftrorum  myfte- 
riorum  libros  :  Ego  autem  qiiodam  humili  modo  ('inter  cxteras  querelas  meas)  de  tarn  loii- 
ga  incerpolita  mora  conquerebar ,  inter  ejufdcm  fde  meis  rebus)  faftam  relationem  ,  & 
Caf'neum  de  eifdeni  recipiendum  refponfum,  Ille  vcro  fe  fimpliciiUme  C^farea  Majefti  vifa 
auditaque  (penes  me )  retuUffe  afferuit  ,  nullo  fuo ,  de  eifdeni ,  adhibito  judicio.  Ve- 
runij  C<e/"«ri  (dixicj  quafi  impoflibilia  vel  incredibiliafuiire  vifa.  Ec  de  refponfo  mihi  (\n 
hac  parte)  dando  ,  fecum  ,  adhuc,  fuam  deliberare  velle  Majcftatem  C^prf (Tw.  LInde  ego 
de  literis  liieis  iftis  ,  fu.e  Majefti  mittendis  ,  mentionem  feci  &  fummatim  earundem  teno- 
rem,  eidem'enarravi.  Ille  eafdcai  ftatim  habere  voluit ,  ipfi  C£fare£  Majeftati  a  Meridie 
mittendas  :  Ego  quidem  C.i[arif  me  velle  ad  pauculos  dies  expeftare  adventiun  dixi,  Deinde 
de  rebus  Mathematicis  brevilTime  inter  nos  habico  fermone,  illique  (ad  pervidendum)  dato 
libello  quodam  Geometrico  (  per  me  &  Federkum  Commandinuw  Vrbinatem  )  in  lucem  dim 
dato,  &  mutuis,  poft,  utrinque  promillis  ofticiis  hunianitatis  &  benevolentia?,  abiir. 

1584.     Sept. 22. 


Saturday^  .?fpff»;i.  29.      Vie  S audi  Michae lis. 

The  forefaid  Letter  to  the  Emperours  Majefty,  with  this  Letter  to  the  Ambafladour  ,  and 
thisPoltfcripr  :  And  moreover,  (according  to  the  Ambafladour  his  requeft)  the  Copy  of 
the  Emperours  Letter,  all  in  one  uttermore  paper  clofed  (Letter  like)  feajed,  and  with  fu- 
perfcription  to  the  forefaid  Ambaffadoiir  ,  1  fent  to  his  honour  on  Michaelmas  day  at  din- 
ner tmie  ,  by  E/wric/tf  5fi«t^!r:  Who  delivered  the  fame  to  the  i>ecretary  of  the  Ambafla- 
dour, and  he  to  the  Lord  AmbafradoUr,  as  he  fat  at  dinner. 

Deiif  bene  vertat^ad  laudem 
mminis  ^ui.        Amen, 


September  2^. 

Remember  that  this  day  (after- noon)  I  fent  H«^(&  on  foot  with  my  Letters  to  Cracovia. 
to  Edmonds  that  my  folk  fliould  not  be  out  of  quiet,  or  afeard  to  fee  Miftrefl!e  Kelly  ,  fent 
for,  and  no  Letters  to  come  from  me,  e5~c;  I  writ  to  the  Lord  Laskje  of  our  want  of  mo- 
ney, 6>c. 


Mondayi  O&obrit  I.    a  Meridie  circa  ^.  horam.     Pragae,' 
'        Oratione  dcminica  finita  ,  &c.      Valde  citb  eft  fafta  apparitio. 

E.  K.    Here  be  two,  one  his  face  is  covered  ,  and  the  other  is  not :  vrki.. 
And  he,  whofe  face  is  uncovered  fcemeth  to  be  Gabriel.  oainei. 

A.    Sit  benediftus  Deus  Pater,  Deus  filius,  &  [Deus  Spiritus  Sanftus  nunc   &  Semper; 
Amen. 

A.   Our  chief  caufe  (  at  this  inftant )    whywerefort  to  thisfhevv-ftone,   is  for  to  under- 
-  fiand  faccording  to  the  grounds  of  God  his  promife  )  the  ftate  of  my  wife  her  grievous  dif-  J""^  »*o^''i 
eafe,  and  means  to  cure  her,  wherein  if  it  pleafe  the  Lord  to  be  mercifull  unto  her  and  me,  '""«'';'"« 
it  ftiall  be  the  occafion  whereby  (he  will  all  her  life  time  praife  the  name  of  God  for  his  mer-^^'^^" "''''' 
cies,   and  be  of  a  quietter  minde  ,  and  not  fo  tt^y  and  fretting  as  fhe  is. 

f^f^o  are  J!0U,  or  from  whence  ce»te  you,  that  you  require  fsience   ;  which  fee}{,  to    he  more  Gibndl   ■ 

'fife  and  expert  ,   then  fucb  ^  are  the  Children  and  Dodors  of  this  JForld  ?   whofe  judgements  are 

[ii     3]  rajfif 


2^0      A  true  Relation  ofD\  Dee  his  Mtons  V;iih/fmts,d^c. 


rajh,  and  underfia-.rling  na\ed  :  and  in  yehofe  lips  dwcHeth  no  truth, 
youjhoidd  defervcthe  nj,i]elhal benefit  of  fo  great  and  fandified- g\ 


Who  (l^ay)  are  you.  ,  that 
grace  .■*  <«  to  undcrjhnd  fhe  de- 
termination of  God,  the  power  of  his  Angels,  or  thehrightnep.orokf.urity  of  mans  Soul,  and 
vnderiianding:  loudefperate  finners,  and  partah^ers  vfith  theyoicked  ,  how  canyon  feek  bread  at 
yoi'r  fathers^ands  :  when  you  feel{,  to  Ileal  into  his  barnes?  Tea  ,  into  hit  heufe  ,  and  dining  Ta- 
Thcrobbinp'Wei  ;  and  more  then  that; yea  ,  even  into  h^  privy  Chambers  :  net  to  fpoylhimofhishoujhold  jhffe, 
God  of  hii  hu-  ofhk  Gold  ,  or  precioM  Hones ,  but  of  the  diademe,  and  Crown  of  his  evcrlajiing  Majeiiy  and  ho- 
nour.  „our  -.you  arethievesand  robber s;^x\A  through  the  Dignity  of  your  fpint  you  Ihall  think  to  exalt 

yor,r  fdlves,andto  live  in  Majcflyvviththe  world. 

'true  it  is,  you  may  live  fo  :  But  you  live  with  an  Harlot,  and  Jhall  popjfe  the  reward  of  Fornica- 
tors and  Ahilterers. 

Therefore  feek  not  to  feed  of  fuch  fooiy  as  the  holy,  and  hhffed  mcffengers  ,  and  Miniflers  of  the 
God  of  H''lb  and  glory  do  tajie  of  :  and  are  comforted  ■,for  they  are  the  fpirits  of  truth  and  nnder- 
jtanding:  fuch  as  cle>ive  unto  their  God,  and  fight  againji  the  abominations  ,  and  horrible  blafphe- 
mies  of'^tbe  world  and  her  adherents:  which  (becaufe  yon  fet  your  felves  againji  them')  fljall  kjep, 
and  clofe  up  the  brightneffe,  and  obfcurity  of  each  Soid  from  you,  that yiur  ignorance  may  be  greater; 
and  J  our  dar^tieffe  thici{er,  and  that  you  may  return  without  light :  to  the  Barathrum  of  ignorance , 
Superbia  phi-  ^^^^^  pride, [elf -love,  and  the  Children  of  vanity  have  their  habit atisn. 
laotia  vant-  ^^^.^  (per  adventure)  will  you  fay  within  jour  felves  .-"There  be  other  doors,  there  be  other  woods  ; 

''^'  yea,  there  be  other  wayes ,  let  m  therefore  feek,  out  them. 

K/goi-E/fmfn-        Ji,!t  behold,  I  will  put  up  front  yoH  all  Elemental  Vigor  :  So  that  the    Fountains  of  coagulation 
^°^"'  (liall  he  dried  when  you  fec\tkeni,  and  the  natural  nourifhment  and  food  of  parts  that  dwell  in  one 

?ahlT°'      'proportion  fhallhide  themfehes ,   and  be  afleep  whenyou  feek,  them;  yea,  in  the  loweji  I  will  place  a. 
threefold  door-bar,  lironger  then  a  Reck.of yearn  ,  which palfltand  between  your  eyes  and  kjtow 
led^e  ^  and  you  pallnotfee :  for  per  adventure  you  may  fay  in  your  felves. 
A.  fue  lapis      '^^ehold,  there  is  a  fcience  known ;  yea,  there  is  a  conjunftion  of  [a]  equal  qualities,  opening  ««- 
fh,lo[opbo,um    ^^  ^  ^j^^  mylieries  of  comfort  in  infirmities,  that   is  not  fo.     0 you  foolip  :  for  neither  here,    nor 
there,  IJjail  you  finde  the  Lord,  if  you  follow  thefteps,  and  defiled  wayes  that  the  world  teacheth 


rent  Argsli 
Va. 

/mnurum 
jjldndof  v,l 

tbjcunlai 


intelltg>fnr. 
If. 


you. 


tfe<  mundi  Irim'tcl  effe  debe- 
mus,!(y  mundus  nos  odia  profe- 
quiiiir  propter  Dmm. 


Gabrhi. 

JUifericordia 

Dnjuper/S. 


For  I  faid  of  you :  Lo  ,  I  will  place  you  againji  the  world  ,  that 
my  name  may  be  magnified  ,  and  the  world  fhall  hate  yon  far  my 
cake. 

A.  O  Lord,  be  mercifuU  unto  us  :  Deal,  O  Lord,  with  us,  as  I  have  put  my  truft  in  thee: 
Turn  away  thy  wrath  (O  God)  and  vifit  us  in  mercy  :  O  God,  O  Lord  ,  what  grievous  fay- 
ings  are  thefe  ? 

Gabriel T'rou^le  [a]  thou  not  thy  heart,  hut  hear  the  vtyce  ef  me,  Gabriel,  the  man  of  God. 

I  am  the  true  niedecine  of  Inch  as  put  their  truji  in  the  God  of  Hojis,  and  in  his  fon  Chriji ;  which 
is  the  Lamb  of  life,  and  the  comfort  of  his  father,which  give  unto  thofe  that  thirli,  the  true  medecine 
of  comfort  and  coufolationj  neither  fhall  God  forfake  thee  ,  neither  fhall  thy  Soul  be  de- 
ceived. 

But  it  hehoveth  thefe  things  to  he  fpokjn,  that  fitt  might  he  corrected,  and       Not*  caulamacerbxin- 
the  name  of  him  that  fent  m,  magnified.  crepatims iftm. 


Here  placing.  A.  In  nomine  Dei  loquitur, 
qui  per  omnes  Angelos  loqui- 
tur :  licet  enini  Vriel  dixerit 
vel  alius ,  tanien  Deus  Temper 

KMphus  ad-  loquitur. 

hue  Mifeucor- 

di*  capax. 


Gabriel,  Hear  my  voice  :  as  I  faid  unto  thee  ,  fo  will  1 
place  thee  here.  And  from  hence  thou 
fhalt  have  fcience  and  underflanding,</«^ 
thou  (halt  be  favourable  in  the  eyes  of  him, 
that  I  favour  not :  that  wy  glorie  might  be 
exalted  in  him,  and  againji  his  childilh- 
nelTe.  Tet,  I  will  be  mercifuU  to  him ;  yet 
if  he  hear  me.      E.  L. 


......  Vnto  thee  PE.  K.l  J  fay,  (O  thou  that  art  a  worldling)    •    A  voyce  from  an  uncertain  pi j«. 

iwillftir  up  friends  amongji  you  ,   and  I  will  fill  thy  hands  with     The.   -.  W  wjc^a^^.p.. 
that  thou  defirefl :  But  that  thou  receivejl  in  the  one,  I  will  plucky    ,       &  &  ^ 

lack,  in  the  other,  that  when  thou  wouldeji  be  wife,  thou  fhalt  not,  £_  j^ 

and  when  thou  wouldefl  fee,  thou  fhalt  not. 

A.  E.  K,  Was  very  much  offended  at  thefe  fharp  words,  d^c.  and  would  have  left  oflT, 
&c. 

Uriel Inobcdiens  es,  &  cafligatlonc  dignus. 

^        -       .        Gabr As  for  the  vertue  of  the  holy  fpirit  *  (  fpokjn  of)  the  gift  of  medeeine  ,  and  healing 

fn^'''*^'*  (which  you  call  Phyfiek)  ALts^yotikjiow  not. 

Inf*' 


A  true  delation  <?/"  D^  De  e  his  AB'tons  "with  fpirits,  &  c.         251 


Infani  fmt  omnes  ,  &  fatui :  For,  Phyfick  is  in  very  deed, 

the  true  ,  and  perfeft  fcience  of  the  natural  combination,  ,  m-<'r'o  .yfd,ans,  Mtd,anacaverafy 

and  proportion  of  known  pares,  anfwering  in  graduation  ^rofon.om  parmm  no,ar,.m  detho  mUo 

real  ,  to  one  principal  and  defined  ;  iS  Therefore   above  the  refpendennum  in'graJuatinnercaliad  unum 

capacity  offuch  as  are  worldlings ^and  do  hunt  after  money  more  /"''''t'i'-'t^,  <b  defmitum  effc, 
then  the  truth  of  Gods  fpirit. 

Uriel  as  a  wit-  But  lo^  light  flandeth  by  me,  and  my  words  are  medicine  : 

ttejfejiandi>;g  by.  and  whatfjever  I  fpeak.^  light  leareth witnejfe  of  me : 

Therefore  are  my  words  true. 

} Have  paHence  awhile.  A.    He  difappeared. 

A.  We  examined  the  definition  of  Phyfick  to  be  a  very  apt  anfvyering,  both  to  the  Anato- 
mical natures  of  man,  or  any  patient,  and  alfo  of  the  Herb,  or  iimplcj  that  is  medici- 
nal ,  &c. 

A.  He  came  again  and  proceeded. 

Gab.  ...JVhich  confijieth  of  two  parts,the  kjiowledge  of  cxlejlial  radiation  (jhe  caufe  ofVi]  com- 
bining) and  of  Elemental  vigor,  the  jiayy  and  caufe  of  [2]  proportion.  w1  V  "*   '"l 

The  firjiy  and  cixlejhal  is  threefold^  that  is  to  fay,  from  God,  from  the  Angels ,  from  mans  mcJalii, 
Soul. 

Thefecond  (  that  is  to  fay  Elemental )  is  the  kjiowledge  of  the  liar  [i]  coagulating  ;  of  the  ["2"] 
fabttla  of  the  parts  nourijhed,  of  the  [3]  conjundion  of  lik^  qualities. 

(  Here  is  the  true  Art  of  Fhyficl{.  ) 
"Thisfecend  is  threefold. 
After  a  while  I  come  again. 
A.    He  is  comeagain,  and  proceeded, 
.    Gab Goto. 

A.  In  thenameof  Jefus.  * 

Gab Thenyott  are  difeafed,you  are  fick.:  yon  mufi  have   a  Tbyfitian  :     why  theft,  jour 

Fhyfitian  mujibe  fuch  as  hath  this  Science,  to  judge  your  difeafe. 

Whether  (  for  fin  )  it  come  friim  God  :   andfo  by  prayer  to  be  cured  \  Deus  i.' 

Or  from  the  Angels,  as  the  Minijiersof  Gods  Juiiice  (  generally  )  for  defert  or  for  reproof:      AMgelnsi. 

Or  from  the  foul  of  man,  as  from  the  chief  life  of  the  body  ,  whofe  infeftlon  radically,  and  by  the  Ammd  hominit, 
injitteHCe  of  proportions  immediate,  (hidden  from  man,  but  k,nown  unto  us,  J  .ii  called  C  with  us)    ea^' 
Mazah  :  wifA  jo«,  Impictas.  '  -^  InfSw  amms. 

Impietds. 

Ihefe    are    the  ftrji    three  j     and    Magicall    Caufes  :      The    other    three    ere    Elemen-Tres  magk&  ■ 
tall.  cMjx. 

1.  Either  b]f  the  (iar^that  ff  caufe  of  coagulation   and  imbibiijg  of  mans  fperm   i>i   the  femine     Stella,  i, 
lUod,  Without  the  which  it  could  not. 

2.  The  other  (  that  is  the  fecond)  through infe&ion  of  meates  which  are  divers  ,  wherewith  the     Cibus.  z. 
thing  is,  [^  and  ]  continueth,  which  in  their  kjnds  are  many. 

3.  The  lafi,  by  conpmaion  or  mixture  :    which  m  the  fecret  property  that  draweth  infiSiion  from     Mtxtii.z. 
man  to  man. 

Thefe  if  you  kjtow  (  for  he  is  no  Fhyfitian  if  he  kjiow  them  not )  how  they  are  and  live,  and  are 
joyneitogether  in  their  proportions,    and  alfo  when   they  exceed,  or   are  diminifjjed,  in  that  they  ^"'"'^"  '"'"' 
are  you  Jhall  be  able  to    bring    them   to   their  proper    hcins  ,  wherein  they   are  ratified  and^/'T  ""'"''''' 
rejoyce.  joritm. 

(^  A.    He  was  away  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  ] 

Gab Lo,  thefe  are  feeds  and  foundations  :  and  here  I  have  (  according  to  my  property) 

touched  the  leaji  of  my  jirings  for  you. 

If  now  you  intend  to  excell  the  Fbyfitiansof  the  Earth,  and  to  help  thofe  that  are  d\(tzftd,  Medicinavera 
fincerely,  truly,  and  through  the  power  and  mercy  of  God  ; 

Then  muji  you  attend  upon  me,  and  my  expofitions,  for  fortj  dayes,  wherein  I  will  open  unto  4o-  D^Y"- 
jou,  many  and  Mikjtown  fecrets  ;     and  will  comfort  yon  with  this  one  herb  or  branch  of  my  Garden,  fruc  G:ibr;el- 
to  the  intent  you  may  perceive  I  am  true  Gabriel.  virut  Gx^n^X. 

"But  as  in  you  that  are  hearers,  due  obedience    ought  to  be,  fo  tnufl   I  kjep  the  Authority   and  Abainnentei  fy 
gravity  of  a  Schoolmajier,  fuffering  none  to  hear  my  marine,  but  fuch  as  are  ablHnent  and  clean- e«».'<jf«  a  psc 
fed  from  their  fins.  '^^^^ 

I        Confider  therefore,  what  the  mercies  of  God  are,  the  fruit  and  value  of  this  Dodrine,  and  the 

uakfd" 


1  «^  I        <iJ  true  ^lation  of  D^,  Dee  his  JBions  mth  fpirits,  &c. 


Refpsnfum  -jq-  nakjdntjfe  and  neceffity  of  the  world  that  requireth  it,  and  then  anfwer  me, 

Aiwl'vm   &       Far  your  anfwcr  is  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  of  whofe  help  and  comfort  I  bear  witneffe. 

conf4.tm  Dei.        ^ut  as  touching  thy  wife,  her  difeafe  is  in  the  firjl  Elementa/,  and  very   dangerous j  and  threat- 

fanji   «.t,  M     neth  her  child, yea-and her  jelf death. 

men    mrbttt  -^  ^  i      --,  r  ii    j-     /• 

feitculajiis.  A.  Lord,  therefore  I  retort  unto  thee,  who  art  the  Curer  of  all  dieales. 

Gab But  to  morrow  (  if  thou  refart  here,  ) 

I  W'll  tell  thee,  what  it  is,  and  will  define  of  it. 

Lor.i,  I  truft,  it  fliall  be  cured :   What  is  unpofliblcunto  our  God  ? 

Gab. I  reafe. 

A,  InccfTant  praife  and  honour,  be  unto  the  Alaiighty,  moft  bountiful,  and  wife  God,  the 
Lord  of  Hofts,  our  God  and  King. 

Amen.  ' 

Remember  I  fent  letters  to  Cracow  by  the  Meflager  of  Trage; 


Tuefday,  OUobrii  2.  Mane  hora  9.     t  Pragae. 
A.   Orationibus  finitis,ad  Deum,  &c.     Deus  in  adjutoriura  noftrum  intende,  &c. 

E.  K.  Here  they  be. 

A.  Gratia  Dei,  patris,&filii,&  Spiritus  Sanfti,  fit  fuper  nos  nunc  Sc  fempcr  8c  in  faecula 
fa:cu!orum.     Amen. 

A.  They  paufcd,  before  they  fpake,  very  long. 

A.  Perhaps  they  expeft  our /?;//»'fr,  as  concerning  our  cleanfing  and  abflaining from  fins; 
Herein  I  crave  at  Gods  hands  his  grace  and  mercy ,  and  intend  and  defire  both  to  be 
purged,  and  alio  to  abftain  not  onely  40  dayes,  but  all  my  life,  to  the  beft  of  my  abili- 
ty, &c. 

Gab Paris  habemut  omnia,  Immundif  nihil. 

A.  I  befeech  you  for  God  his  fake,  d^/jer  vifcera  niifericordia  Altijfimi,  that  you  would  de-*, 
clare  uuco  us  a  certain  remedy  of  my  wife  her  difeafe,  &c. 

Gabr When  thy  wife  was  a  milkjefubiiance,  growing  by  the  perfedion  of  the  place,    and 

Q  y:r!us.      influence  radical,  (which  onely,  is  the  gift  of  the  Sun)   then,  was  not  the  Matrix,  or  bag  of 

Nature  (  whereinjhe  encreafed  j  perfea,   or  of  f:fficient  retention  :    By  reafon  of  a  fe aver  going 

Feb/' laborab.H  before  the  conception  :  So  that^  the  Angelical  admm  fir ation, generally  containtng,the  veffe!  of  lifey 

Mater  uxnni    j-^^.  the  proportion  of  the  world, ^  entred  by  force  of  their  Order  imiHediately,before  the  [AJinward 

""m  '^*%mZ  p'irts,were  efiablijhedin  their  nutriment  and  proportion. 

the  foul  is  fent  Which  is  the  caufe,  that  the  fecond  ■^  veffel,  and  lowefi  of  nature  (  for,  your  terms  I  mufi  vfe  ) 
'"'  '"  y  is  fo  thin,  avd  tyed  (liort,  that  it  is  n'jt  able  to  keep  in,  or  retain,  the  fimile  and  quidditie  of  her  own 
r^'.Z  ^'"'' fxHi^ntial being  andfeed. 

*  Forfan,  vafa      Wherefore, when  the  refi  of  her  digefiions  (according   to  her  age  and  natural  ftrength  )  fulfil 

jeminctria.        ^j^^j^  offices,  by  degree  to  be  received  into  that  receptacle  ;     then,  doth  the  force  of  nature  quail  : 

and  by  the  fibtilty  of  the  principle,  or  matter  ejefttd,    (which  feek^eth  to  tak^e  up  on  every  center 

a  dwelling  place,  ^  the  guts  and  pajfages,  are  of  ended  and  fcalded  with  an    intemperate  heat: 

the  .nofi fulttle  and  Jharpeji part,  being  of  a  moii  penetrating   vertue  ;  {and  therefore  feekjng 

■*hc    T      p'rff^rge  )  mix'-th  her  (e\'cwith  the  excrements,  where  refting,  (he  turneth  unto  her  firiKorm,  which 

!'=      S       is  blood  ;    IVhofe  ®uintejftnce  wor\eth,  in  her  own  property  and  beginning,  andforceththe^Q  ex- 

"'  crement  RcrcorA  many  times  to  become  bloody,   the  other  part  being  mere  heavy,  notwithfianding 

unapt  to  defcend,  (QM,i:inatiiraqujerIt  omne  fuum  )  beconieth  corrupted  ;   and  fo  by  vertue  of 

Etcrementa       nature,  is  cafi  oat  as  uu  [2]  excrement,  beingblood  and  matter. 

But  I  tell  thee,  that  fo  long  as  Nature  was  in  the  lowefi  degree,   and  the  fperm  kjpt  more  near 
tcgfther,by  reafon  of  the  finrhual  heat  in  youth,  it  was  not  faulty  in  her  : 
The''brc«hir"       ^'^ '"  her  fixteenth  year,  when  they  were  m  re  heavy  and  fought  ijftie  and  defcenfron,  then  began 
or  vapm'rin'"^  N'rture  to  feel  the  efff&,  in  the  places,  and  ve(fel,  which  is  the  ground  of  her  retention,  the  chief  hafis 
heat.  and  Mother  of  her  dwelling. 

B'hold  now,  being  f^tive,  and  the  force  of  heat  drawn  to  the  nutriment  of  the  Creature  ;    More' 
Vw'jampfig-  ^^^^  thf  other  part  A&ive  compelled  into  a  nearer  place,  by  the  impediment  of  imagination,  ^r/'«g- 
Inwelnation.   ("^^^  <ire at  danger  now,  by  reafon  that  Nature  is  become  very  weak,  and  not  able  to  make  excremen-  , 
tal  expn'fon. 

But 


I'  — ■     ' '         " — '  -  —    ■  ,  —  '       —  ~^  •  ■  ■     "    ■  '  I'  .     ■■-  _  ...        I  . _^ 

(3^  true  Relation  of  D*".  Dee  his  ABions  mth  /j?irifs,d<.C  2  ^  j 

But  do'-  thsu  thinks  that  there  is  a  remedy  to  this  difeafe  ? 

A.   Yea  verily,  thro';gh  the  wifdom  and  mercies  of  tlie  Higheft. 

Gabr 4.1havetuifgbtthedife>ife;  I  re/// go  and  fee  if  there  be  a  remedy. 

A.  The  Godo?  Alirabam,  Ifiac,  and  Jacob,  be  merciful  to  my  wife  and  me,  and  fend  her 
remedy  and  cure  of  her  grie£ 

E.  K.  Here  he  is. 

Gab Come  again  after  Diner. 

b..     We  had  been  lent  for  to  diner,  twice  or  thrice  before.  So  we  went. 

A.  Mifericordi.E  Dei  line  f  per  nos.  Amen, 

After  Diner,  circa  hor am  i. 
A.  Wcrcforted  totheMyftery:  and  fhortly,  they  appeared  both. 

E.  K.  Here  they  be  both. 

A. 

Gab T'ulir  pure  wheat,  a  piiite  :  one  Pheafant-Coch^  alive,  an  eleven  ounces  of  Mifcttline 

Anihfy  (  "^hich  IS  the  white  Amber  )  an  ounce  and  a  quarter  of  'turpentine.  TheD^yficil 

A.  Of  waflicd  Turpentine  >  lemedy. 

Gab Turpentine  that  if  wafJ:edlofeth  hit  vertfie.  ■ 

Break,  the  Cock^in  pieces  with  a  pe'id,  (  his  feathers  pluckj:  of  J  pound  the  Amber  fmall. 

Tut  all  this  into  a  gallon  'f  red  wine. 

.,  ,  May  we  take  the  red  wine  of  this  Country  ?  * 

Gab I.        Di'tillthem,  with  a  fire  of  the  fecond  heat, 

{|  A.  I  befeech  you,  how  long  lliail  they  ftandin  fteep  ? 

Gab As  thou  wilt.  ] 

Still  It  again  the  fecond  time,  (  the  feces  being  cafi  away  )  And  adde  fomething  more  to  the  fire^ 
fe  that  it  be  a  quarter  toward  the  third. 

Let  her  faii  forty  ho^^rs  from  meat :    And  let  her  divide  the^Iedicine  into  three  parts. 

Ihe  firii  part,  let  her  drink^  (  being  milkjwarm  )  by  little  and  little. 

The  fecond  purt,  'et  her  mal^e  a  fawce  of,  for  five  or  Ox  meiiles. 

7he  lai  part, lather  nfe  in  Alfconditis :    And  fhe  fhall  have  health. 

A.  I  befeech  you,  in  how  many  dayes  conipafs  wo  ild  you  have  this  to  be  done? 

Gab It  is  no  cuejtien :   thenet  tfpty  of  thethmgteacheth. 

A.  As  cOTicerning  the  Infant,  what  ftate  is  it  in  ? 

Gab Sh'it  thy  mouth  :   Seek^not. 

A.  I  am  contented, 

A.  As  concern-n  J  a  Pheafant-Cock,   !  know  not  how  or  where  to  get  it. 

Gab. All  the  creatures  of  the  world,  e/f',  help  not.  I  have  tai'ghr,  takf  thou  care. 

A.    The  thanks,  honour,  and  praife,  be  to  the  Higheft,  and  I  thank  you  for  your  charity 
and  good  will,  to  impart  thefe  thmgs  unto  me. 

Gab ro«^<?// ^i^z/fwowarf,  </r  we,  until  you  be  repentant,  and   reconciled.-    and  are  r^g^ffenfia 

made  apt  for  my  School.^  Keconctlmtio. 

E.    K.'  You  might  ^i-z/e  this  Table  'vertue  to  cure  her,  or  cure  her 
with  fome  one  thing,  or  fimple,  if  you  be  good  Angels. 

Gab Vnto  us,  the  vertpie  of  Gods  Creatures  are  known :  which  we  may  open  wtt-o you  :  and ^  „  yx\% 

the  power  of  giving  vertue  is  in  God :  Therefore  ceafe  tf^y  mahtious  tongue,  litlous  tongue 

I  have  no  More.  •  •  againft  God 

E.  K.  They  are  gone.  '  h;s^g°°<iAn- 

A.  Deo  Omnipotenti,  Optimo  &  Maximo  fit  omnis  laus  honor  &  gloria    :    nunc  & 
femper.  Amen. 


Thurfday,  OTrobris  4.  Mane,  hora  10. \  circiter.    t  Prag*. 
Orationibus  variisadDeum,  &:  propanequotidiano  jamin  tempore  neceflitatis,  finitis,  &Ci 
apparitio  fafta  eft. 

E.  K.  Here  is  he,  that  is  covered  with  the  Scarf. 

Uriel. Hear,  0  thou,  [  a  l  that  fayell,  (  if  I  have  put  my         ^   r  1   r 

trujiin  tbee)  hear  me.  If  that  thonmdii  iaried  at'home,and  wan-     ^^^'j      '*''  parcel  of  my  prayers 
ted  my  admonijhment,  thy  children  had  been  fcattered,thy  wife  had         ^.  Miferimdias  Dmini  in  ster- 
ended  her  dayes  with  frrow :   and  lo,   the  birds  of  the  air  had     num  cantabo ,  qui  me  fub  alU  (ttUU- 
rejied  en  thy  carkafe,    Iftl}Ouwaiihe/d  by  the  hand,  and  attended     14'*'"  je>-U'ivit,ferv.u,:^feiv»b!r. 
OKi  by  heavenly  Pilots,  when  the  Seas  would  have  fwa/lowed  thee,and 

Satan  had  power  over  thee  ;  If  poifon  had  prevailed,  wherewith  thy  meat  was  often  times  fawced. 
If  the  contimidl  rage  of  S-ttat  and  the  world  had  overthrown  thee.  Then  had  not  I  been  thy 
God,  neither  had  done  well  unto  thee.  But  out  of  all  thefe  I  have  led  thee,  as  a  father  doth  his 

child 


z  e^  4        ^  ^^^^  %elation  of  C*"^  Dee  his  ABions  mth  fpiritSy  &c. 


Prohntio. 


child  from  dtnzer.  And  from  many  more  fcourges  and  adverfities  unk/tcwn    to  thee^  hut  ready  to 
If.  afflict  thee.     H'therto,  thou  fayeji  unto  vie ^  If  :  What  haji  thou  done  for  me  y  or  added  untomy 

name  ?  Wh'it  haft  thou  loji'  that  I  have  not  given  thee  ?  or  what  canji  thouhave,  that  I pluck^hack^? 
Hear  my  voice.  He  that  loveth  the  world^  loveth  not  me  ;  for  what  I  do  I  do:  and  what  lam^I 
am:  And  1  made  nothingwithout  acaufe.  7hou  halt  not  yet  begged  for  my  name,  neither  hall: 
been  iniprifoned  for  my  fake  ;  But  I  have  turned  the  prifon  from  thee,  and  have  opened  un- 
to thee  my  myfterie^.  I  fay  unto  thee.,  I  amtkebegnming.,  and  an  undefiled  Spirit^  and  there  u 
vo  riches  that  is  without  me.  If  I  fliould  not  fiifFtr  thee  to  be  proved,  "then  were  thou  not  for  me ; 
SaVanswhins  For.,  thofe  ik^H  a'/e  mine,  tajle  tribulation  :  But  when  Satan  hathffent  hit  whip  5  If  thou  be  found 
are  long  in  faithful,  J  will  place  my  covenant  with  thee  and  thy  children.  And  I  will  be  revealed  unto  them, 
fpending.  wtto  the  end  of  the  world.    Silver  and  Cold  I   give  not;    But  my  bleffingy    is   above    the  fub- 

Fel  tibe.idum,    ^i^,^..g  g^  ^y    Earth.    Dayes  there  be,  that  thou  niuft  drink  of  gall,and  a  time  cometh,  when 
/l"f  l^/'"'""'    thou  (lialt  drink  wine.    In  the  mean  feafon,  thofe  that  give  unto  thee,  I   will  mnltiply  all  they 
hdve  With  hlejjing  a  thoufand  fold  if  or  tkofe  that  give  unto  thee,  I  will  give  unto  them  i    And  thofe 
that  flpck.b-ick^  from  thee,  Iwill  alfo  pluck^back^  fromtbem*  Thofe  that  are  of  me^bave  no  fpf, 
for. I  am  all  beauty. 

E.  K.  But  will  you  give  us  meat,  drink,  and  cloathing  ? 

*OKe!ly,t^ell}t,  paulus  ad  Cor.  Epijl.  i.  c<if.  ly.  ^  7;bf re j^<z//c9Wf  «  riwf5fifyou  dwell  together  and  love  iiie) 
wr!„  5 1.  (&•  5i  Ecce  mfjhrium  rJobis  ^ly^^  i^^jje  twiuk  of  an  eye,  you  /hal  1  breath  your  laft,  and  live 
fid  cmvcs  muJmnr :  mom  m  &  ^gam.-  t»dl  will  kjc^mder  my  feet  all  the  proud  Nations  of  the 
jaritoaliySic.    •  Earth::  for  my  day  is  at  hand.     But  I  am  a  jealouf  God :    Be 

ThcCominKTion,  and  manner  of  therefore  faithful.  J f  I  fend  thee  forth,  znd  they  hezr  thee  not : 
propUefving  againft  the  incredulous,  ^r  meafure  thee,  as  a  fl}adow,at  noon  dayes.  Go  unto  the  mountains 
andtal{e  up  (tones  and  break^them  in  pieces  with  a  mighty  peflel ,  caji  them  again(i  thewifjdes,  and 
into  the  four  parts  of  the  Earth.      And  fay,  Ihiis  and  t]\Hi  he  it  unto   them:    'Thus  and  thns  let 

Confirmuion   the  Lord  work  for  me  :  and  thy  prophefe  jhallbe  true,  and  it  (hall  cometopaffe  that  thou  faye^, 

of  the  Pro-  ^^  Ukj'wife  if  they  hear  thee,  do  unto  them,  that  my  bkjjing  may  alfo  be  kjiown. 

The  manner  of      ^-    Lord,  what  fhall  I  do,  if  they  hear  me  > 

bleding  Pro-        Uriel Do  unto  them  the  figns  of  good  ;  as  tt  jl) all  come  into  tkymind. 

P'^"'"l'  I  come  again.  E.    /f.    He  is  gone. 

A.  I  thank  thee  O  God,  for  this  great  comfort ;  my  heart  is  greatly  rcfrcihed  therewith  ; 
Thou  art  my  Gods 

L,  We  read  over  the  premifleSo 

E.  K.  He  is  here  ao;ain.' 

1 K  Intending      J^y  doll  thou  [E .  K.]  feek  to  flee  fro  »t  me,  and  ferret ly  pntteji  into  thy  heart,  8cc. 

to  depart,  and      A.  He  fpake divers  things  to  E.  K.  which  chiefly   concerned  himfelf:  and   he  wouldnot 

1  not  knowing,  m-fgj.  them  as  now  :  But  he  told  me,    That  he  was  determined  to  have  fold  his   cloths,  and 

with  as  much  fpeed  as  he  could,  with  his  wife,  to  have  gone  to  Hamburgh,  and  fo  to  Englandy 

&c.    If  his  wife  would  not  go,  that  he  would.  ni> 

Uriel Hear  me,'Ihere  is  not  any  one,vioreflrong,ntore  rich,  or  more  friendly.,  than  I,  &C. 

A.  He  fpake  much  again  to  E.  K.  of  himfelf,  which  he  exprefled  not. 

E.   K.  It  is  true,  I  will  follow  God  j    but  I  doubt  that  yon  are  not- 
of  God. 

My  wifenot  to      Uriel /  willpewyou  the  water  :  do  what  you  lifi.      I  fay  unto  thee  [  A  ]  Takf  not  thj.^ 

go  now  to  Cra-  ^/^f  Jane  with  thee,  leajl  thou  have  a  new  forrow.  , 

"'*'•  Three  of  you  jhall  go^  The  fourth,  [  T.  K.  3   (  which  «  [  E.  K.  ]  his  brother  )  Jhall  be  a  fer*^ 

vant  to  his  houfc.  .  , 

Vriel  our  I  can  well  keep  it. 

Houfe  keeper.  j^^j  ^j^^^  t^5„  comeji  into  Poland,  be  not  known.  Lead  oat  Lasky  by  the  hand,  and  bring  him 
ik^'  k'r  ,■  hither.,  and  prophefie  a^ainft  his  enemies,  that  I  may  break  them  iu  pieces  :  and  may  b.cmind- 
his  enemiej  as  f"l  of  my  Covenant. 

in  the  former      He  hath  much  need  of  Counfel.  ,)1 

praftice  was         J  am  with  you. 

"^  '  E.  K.  He  is  difappeared. 

A,  Deo  noftro,  Domino  noftro  &  Sanftificatorl  noftro  Oranipotenti,3eterno,&  mifericordi  fit 
omnis  laus,  gratiarum  aftio,  honor  8c  gloria  nunc  &  femper.  < 

Amen.  -: 

'■X 

Fridafji 

.id 


A  true  delation  of  D^  Dee  his  Jciions  xvithffints,  &c.         2  5!$ 


Fryday,  Odohrii  5, 
At  afternoon  came  one  of  Dcaoiir  Onrtz  his  fervants  from  his  Mafter  to  tell  me,that  his  Ma- 
ftcr  would  come  tome  to  morrow  in  the  morning  about  feven,  eight,  or  nine  of  the  Clock  as 


Saturday,  OSobrit  6t    M-mc. 

Before  feven  of  the  Clock  I  thought  good  rather  my  felf  to  go  to  Doftour  Carfe,  then 
to  frffer  him  to  come  to  me  fo  far,  and  that  for  divers  ca.fes  :  So  I  v^ent  tohimjan  1  came  be- 
fore he  was  ready.  At  hi*  being  ready  he  cams  forth  ,  but  nothing  with  fo  clicarfull  n  coun- 
tenance to  welcome  me  as  he  did  at  the  firft  ;  I  conjectured  that  he  fufpefted  that  I  would 

■  take  his  words  in  evil  part  ,  which  he  had  to  fay  to  me  from  the  Emperour,  which  (after  I 
had  fomcwhat  fpokeii  of  the  book  that  1  lent  him,  and  Ibme  other,  that  had  vv  lirten  fome- 
Wbatof  fuch  matter  of  diviiion  of  fiiperficies,  and  he  had  told  me  that  tliis  my  book  was  the 
nioft  excellent  in  that  Argument,  and  lb  made  a  paufe ,  he  be^^an  ia  this  fort  in  two  pares  to 
divide  his  fpeech  ,  and  (aid  that  C^farea  fua  M.jjias  r,uaHtum  /'J  fit  a  peccata  (per  M-  rcpre- 
hfftfa')  folet Coiftftonarium  adh  here  tempore  &  loco  opportmili  ^acque  diffi-lere  il!u>» ds  M'fericor- 

.dia  divma;  ^antum  autem  ad  me  attinehat  ,  piirntitm  ejfe  fuam  (^?idiezm  M'ljejtuteift  mihi 
gratificari  &  ienefacere  imquacuwqve  re  qujc  illim  fiihjiceret  A'fthoritaii :  [  hereupon  anfwer- 
cd,  and  faid  :  Doteo  vrba  men  m  alio  fenfu  intelhifn  vel  concepta  fmjf'  a  fua  Cjefarca  M-ije- 
jiate  quani  intelligi  vel  ioncipi  delebunt  Hon  enim  vte  e]m  fieri  ConfijJiuHdrium  cupiebani  ,  fed 
feccatorejus  ex  cxloriprehtttfi  ffffey  hx  ilii  fignificare  pibebar  ,  tn  feci  :  unde  ille  confoUtionit 
J>lw  haurire  poter^t  ,  quani  ex  confiUt  ahcijm  fiii  amici  ve!  C  n'^ejjtonarii  fiii ,  peccata  ejus  re- 
darg'ientifj  Domini  entnt  Dei  eximium  declarabat  favorem^bcc.  ^Utituvt  v?!0  ad  illam  gtiau  mi- 
hi  0 fir eb at  fua  M  ) eih s  C^Carea.  gratiam  ,  humilUme  ac  ep-ibuni.  N'nc  vero  qpod  defiderem 
titulo  Philofophi  &  Matkemntici  Csfarei  inftgHiri  caufa.  eli muhip-ex;  ti*m  refpeQn  fecret,  me'  fer^ 
vitii  erga  C;ctarem  ,fub  to  prxtextu  cxlandi  quam  wajoris  authoritatis  &  f.tvcrii  ap  d  C  tlaiia-. 
nos  &  Anglos  nt^i^s^  ne  vel  ilia  ijtc  wgjs  agere  videar^  &  nullius  effe  <e iimat'.aii ,  vcl  1  tit  et/am. 
viderer  aptus  ,coMtra  quern  fuum  invidiam  &  maledlcenuffimam ^  ut  incepere  ,  exercerent  Imguam 
i,>tpune,8cc.  Oruattigitur  D.  Lurtz'nim  iit  Cxiat  cam  fuam  M'ijejiam  a.lmoneret  de  indebitA 
interpreiatione  illorum  verhorum  qjiibiis  vitia  ejui  redarguebantur^&cc.  Tiien  lie  fpake  of  the  fe- 
cond  Letters  to  the  Emperour  ,  the  eltcft  whereof  he  had  heard  at  my  hands  ,  and  liad  lent 
onMifi'»f/»»(»  even  to  the  Emperours  Majefty,  a  note  and  advife  ot^  them ,  as  he  now  faid. 
And  did  willi  that  they  had  been  delivered  before  the  Emperour  had  refolved  on  the  for- 
mer anfwer  :  Thofe  Lecters  ((aid  I)  are  in  the  Ambalfadours  of  S  aini  hands ;  and  if  he  will 
not  deliver  them  to  day,I  will  fetch  them  for  y.iu  : if  you  do(faid  he)l  will  deliver  them  ftraighc 
way,  for  at  eighth  of  the  Clock  yo.;  fhall  have  me  in  the  Kitter  ftove  ,  or  hear  of  niL  there» 

,  Then  (faid  I)  I  will  llraight  way  goto  the  Ambaiiadour. 

I  vftnt  unto  the  ^  mbaifadour  of  Spain,  and  reported  all  that  had  pafTed  between  me  and 
jy.  Curtz-  He  faid  that  by  rcafon  of  his  divers  atfairs  he  had  not  good  opportunity,  never 
fince  the  receipt  of  my  Letters  to  go  to  the  r  m'perours  Majefty  :  But  that  this  day  he  deter- 
mined to  deliver  my  Letters  with  his  own  hand  luuo  his  Vlajeftyifo  with  thanks  given  to  his 
honour  I  departed  :  1  w;?nt  to  the  Ritter  ftove  (or  L  hamber  of  prefencc)  where  I  found  none 
of  the  Guard,  butverymany  fitting  without,  in  the  ftove  were  three,  or  four,  of  which 
one  went  ftraight  waj^  into  the  privy  Chamber  ,  and  by  and  by  D.  Curtz  came  outfrorti'th^ 
Emperour  unto  ms  ,  I  asked  him  if  he  had  told  the  Emperour  of  my  grief  conceived  of  his 
mifunderflanding  my  words  :  he  faid,  I, and  that  the  Emperour  took  ic  not  in  evil  part ,  arid 
fo  of  divers  other  thin  .s  we  had  talk  walking  up  and  down  together  about  a  quarter  of  an 

.  hour  :  Among  other  thingb  1  told  him  that  the  Lord  AmbaflTadour  would  deliver  my  Letters 
himfelf  to  the  Emperours  Majefty,  fo  I  departed,  and  be  returned  back  to  the  Emperour  into* 
the  privy  Chamber.  •♦ 


Sunday,  OExobrit  J.    Mane  hora  7, 
T  fent  to  the  Lord  AmbafTadour  his  houfe  ,  and  there  1  learned  that  the  Ambaffidour  had 
yefterday  delivered  my  Letter  to  his  Majefty  :  And  that  anfwer  was  to    be    expefted  by 
D.  Ci/rtz. 

After  Dinner  I  went  to  Doftor  Curtz  home  to  his  lodging,  and  he  had  nothing  as  yet  to 
fay  of  the  Letter  delivered  by  the  Lord  AmbafTadour:  But  we  fell  to  other  talk,  and  I  told 
him  plainly,  that  I  had  not  hitherto  lived  obfcurely  ,  neither  without  care  of  my  good  fame 
and  name,  maintaining,  and  increafing;  therefore  ii  here  for  my  ilncere  dealing  i  fhould  fecin 
rto  be  defpifed ,  or  not  regarded,  or  to  be  but  a  trifler  ,  ray  thought  I  Ihould  have  great  inju- 
ry :  And  fure  I  was  that  the  Emperouis  Majefty  was  much  ruled  by  him,  and  as  he  did  fraine 
his  judgement,  fo  did  his  Majefty  very  ofcrefolve  in  fuch  matters  as  mine  j  wherefore  it  I 

were 


T56       A  true^elationof  D^  T)tthis  ABionsxipithffmts.^c. 

were  not  ufed  in  my  caufes  as  was  reafonable,  and  for  the  Emperours  honour  it  ftiould  not  be 
laid  to  any  other  mans  charge  but  to  his,  &c.  He  promifed  that  he  would  deliver  ail  in  the 
beft  words  he  could,  in  friendly  fort,«^r.  After  this  he  Oiewcd  divers  his  labours  and  inven- 
rions,  Mathematical,  and  chiefly  Arithmetical  Tables  ,  both  for  his  invention  by  fquarcs  to 
have  the  minute  andfccond  of  obfervations  Aftrononiical,  and  fo  for  the  mending  of  Nitinj us 
his  invention  of  the  Quadrant  dividing  in  90.  pi.  92.  ^t^.&c.  I  then  opened  tobimmy  fecret 
of  my  "laffe,  for  battering  in  a  dark  night, d^'^'.  Hefaid  that  conclufion  would  be  very  accepta- 
ble to  his  Ma jefly ,  I  told  him  that  the  glafTe  was  at  Cracovia^  and  his  Majefty  (hould  fee  it  by 

Gods  leave. 

After  this  I  told  him  that  I  would  full  fain  have  a  Pafport,  or  lafe  conduct  to  palTe  quietly 
and  farcly  in  any  of  the  Emperours  Dominions.  He  thoi'ght  h'ls  Majefty  would  willingly 
"rant  that  and  willed  m:  to  write  three ,  or  four  lines  as  I  would  have  it,  and  he  informed  me 

Ca  farcam  ^uam  Majejlatem  huntillimc  or  at  Joannes  Dec  Anghts^  ferenijlinu  fn^  Majellatit  De- 
votiSlmiii  fervitor  ,utprof»tt  mapri  in  ItineribiK  per  ampli^mum  fii£  Cifareae  MajejUtit  Impe- 
rium  conficienus  fecuritatej  literas  falvi  fajfus  fibi  coucedere  digmretur. 

Joannes  Dec. 

At  my  coming  home,  I  bethought  me  that  I  would  gladly  ,the  faid  Pafport ,  fafc  Condaft, 
or  Letters  of  pafTage,  more  ample  and  beneficial  •,  as  for  my  wife,  children,  family  ,  fcrvants» 
and  goods  whatfoever ,  and  for  one  whole  year  to  dare  from  the  date  of  thefc  prefem* 
thus. 


VVcdnefday,  On  Monday  morning  8.  Oftobris. 
Sacram  fajrw  Carfarcam  Mqejiatem  humillime  orattferewffimx  fu£  Mafejiatif  Vevotifftmuf  fer^ 
vitor  Joannes  Dee  Ang/usy  ut  eidem  Joanni  pro  feipfo  ,  uxore  jua,liheru  fuif ,  fanii/ia  fva.fervito- 
rihuf,  Ancillit  fuii  &  fuppelledili  fita  (juacmque  fua  facra  Cxfarea  M'tjejias  favor abiUs  &  gjraxio- 
f as  fu  as  I  it  eras  falvi  quiet  i  &  liber  i  tranfitus  per  omnes  &  (juafumque  ampliJJiMi  M  Jjejiatif  fu^e  C^- 
fares  Imperii  partes  viafque  ,  &  pro  integri  anni  Qprcxime  j>eji  datam  fr^fetttititu  fequentit)  tent' 
fore  quocimque^  clementer  conceiere  dignaretur. 

Anno  1584.     Oa.S.  JoannesDce. 


Monday,  OSobrU  8. 

I  went  to  Mr.  Doftor  Curtz,  with  thefe  laft  Letters  fair  written «  and  I  found  Kim  to  be  ac 
the  Hoff  rate  Camer  in  Counfel  ;  and  fo  awaiting  till  they  rofe  (^half  an  hour  after  6.  of  tke 
Clock)  he  came  out  with  my  Letters  in  his  hand,which  I  left  yeftcmight  with  him.  1  (hewed 
him  thefe  laft  written  :  And  he  faid  they  ufe  to  limit  no  time  ,  but  to  make  them  indefinite. 
So  he  took  the  laft,  and  I  had  the  former  Letters  back  again  .  He  went  with  them  into  the  pri- 
vy Chamber,  he  faid,  I  fhouid  not  need  to  fend  for  the  Letters,  but  he  would  fend  them  home 
by  his  man,  and  I  went  from  him  toward  the  AmbafTadour  D<»«  Gtdielmo  de  Sando  Clementer 
whom  I  foimd  coming  with  the  Ambafladour  oi Spain  (who  caracthrcc,or  four  dayes  before, 
to  give  the  golden  Fleefe  to  the  EmperourJ  and  the  Marftiall  of  the  Court  to  go  to  theEmpe- 
rour  prcfcntly  to  haVc  audience  :  And  as  I  ftood  in  the  Court  of  the  AmbafTadours  lodging, 
and  they  three  on  horf-back  coming,  the  Ambafladour  my  friend  did  put  off  his  Cap,  fo  did 
the  new  Ambafladour  and  MarOial  twice  very  courteoufly  to  me,  I  faw  it  was  no  time  to  of- 
fer fpeech  to  the  Ambafladour  ;  now  of  my  giving  thanks,  taking  leave,and  requiring  his  plea- 
fure  toward  the  LordLitfi^'f  :  fo  following  them  to  the  Court,I  pafl«d  forward  home  tow^d 
my  Lodging. 


Myfterio- 


^'v.:? 


Myttcrior^i  Pragensium  Confinnatio, 

Anno,    ijSy.   famiani    1 4. 

P  P^   A  Q  M 

Iteruni  vcni   Vrngam  ultimo   Dirtmhis, 

Anno,  ijSj. 


+  ;\r  o  r  £. 


(i/2/;J 


I5P4. 


NNO,  1584,  D(ctmhris  20,  fSfj/,?  Gregoriano")  wc  did  fcE 
forth,  I,Maftcr  AW/;,  Rowland  my  Infant,  \'*uh  his  Nurfc, 
and  ^»hn  Cr$kar  ,  ( in  a  Coach  with  Horfe  ,  which  I  had 
bought  of  Mafter  Frizn)  from  Cracsvta  toward  Prage. 

P  R  A  G  E. 

Becemhris  10.    We  came  to  Pr4ge\n  tke  afternoon. 
Dectmhtr  31.    I  wrcic  to  Don  Culielmo  dt  San^o  Clement  ^  the  Spanifh  Atil- 
bafTador,  as  followeth. 

JLluftriffimc  &  magnifice  Hcros ,  Licet  mea  nondum  privata  curavcrim  negocia : 
proquibus  ordin3ndis,multos  interim  dumhincabfuetim,  &laborcspcrtulcrim,&: 
Tumptus  fcccrim :  Tamcnnoluiliceras  ad  vcflram  magnificcntiam ,  dNobiliffimo 
illo  Domino  M^i^/wSyradicnfi  mifTas  in  multas  horas  a  reditu  mco  retinerc  penes 
nac  :  Ne  aliqua  e  x  partc,officio  viderer  deefTc  meojtam  erga  vcftram  naagnifa'ccntiam^ 
quam  iplum  Dominum  ?Alati»un*.  Qiiantum  vero  ad  Myftcriorura  incredibilium  pio- 
grefTjm,  habeo  &  quae  dicara,  &funtqi)saudiammulta  advciitatiscaufamCinvitif- 
fimis  cjufdem  advcrfariis  quibiifcunquc)elucidandum.Dc  quibus  quando  opportunum 
crit,  paratifTimiiscro,  cumaudire,  tumaudiri:  eoquidera  modo  ,  quofinceritati& 
fidclitati  mea:  erga  C^iy^rfdw  faamMajcflatem  eritconvenicntiffimum.  Interim  ali- 
quotdicrum  intervallum  liberum  rcquiro ,  uttam  xdcsmihi  meifquc  conducara  (fi 
fieri  pofTit)  accommodas,  quam  ut  aha,  ad  rem  familiarem  fpe(ftantia  difponara,' 
Dcus  Optim.  Max.  Magnificentiam  vcflram  ornare  bearcquc  dignetur, 

llluftriffimae  Magnificentiac  Veftrae^ 
Obfequentiffimus, 
\  A  a  Joannes  Dee^ 


354 


■^ ^it*i  ^  «> 


<^mo   \'^%'^.  ?  RAGM. 


FKIDAr, 


w. 


JAnuary  4.  /  ffired  the  H$ufe  in  the  Sal  vjireet  5  oftbe  tvta  Sijlers :  But  Mr.  Chrifto- 
pher  Chriftian,  wZ'O  hudlong  time  been  Chancehr ,  cr  Regtfier  of  eld  i  ragae ,  didmtke 
the  Covenant  or  Bdrgitn  with  me  :  ht  had  Annc  theene  Stfier^  to  Wtfe ,  andthe  other 
Sifter  named  D  ^totbc  ,  had  to  her  husband.    This  Dorothea 

dwelt  tn  the  Houfe^  and  was  to  remove  to  an  other  Houfe  of  her  own  hardly)  :  and  to  deli' 
vet  unto  me  and  mi/.e  the  vfhole  Houfe ^  mth  aJi  the  appurtenances  ofroemes  and  eafements^ 
and  I  to  pay  for  the  fear  70  DoHers :  and  that  eiuarterlj^  {every  3  Monet  hs  expired)  toy  ay 
the  quarters  rent  thereof, 

JAnuary  6.   /jrro/cwD. Jacob Curtius:  OneoftheEmperourstrivyCounfayie,  of 
whom  the  former  Records  of  Prage  Anions  do  make  abundant  mention :  And  a  letter  of 
htr  written  to  me  the  %th.  day  #/Odobcr  Anno  1 5  84  ,  is  beginning  of  the  Book  next 
written  before  this.  7  he  Copy  of  the  Utter  which  I  wrote  now^  is  this, 

IBuftri  O  fS\d^a^mflcoviro  D°JacoboCurtioy^cr4f 
Cefareae  ^\d!^aj^f^atis  ab  arcanis  ConfiliiSy 
Vominomeoflurimumcolendo, 

ILIuftris  &  magnifice  vir-  Majorine  gaudio  affici  debeam  ex  bona  veftra  valetu-' 
dine,  &  falvo  mco  ad  Pragam  reditu  :  an  ex  contumcliis  hie  interim  dum  abfue- 
rim,  contra  mcconfi£tis,'&:  variis  ejaculatisreprehenfionibus  &  quafi  nimis ,  do- 
lorc  torqucii ,  peneincertum  videripoffit.  Ego  quod  ftatuij  hadenus  feci:  fup- 
pellcdlilem  fcilicet  ex  Cracffvia meam  cum  tota  familia  mea ,  hue  jam  adduci  cura- 
vi-,cum  magnis  quidem  laboribus  meisj  &  fumptibus  baud  modicis.  yEdcs  (ex  quo 
jam  vcni)  tales  quales  >  etiam  cum  aliqua  difficultate ,  conduxi.  Et  hac  prefenti 
feptimana,  omnia  hie  noftra  ad  eafdem  citiffime  transferri,remquefamiliarem,  & 
Oeconomicam ,  quodam  craffo  modo  difponi ,  negociorum  mcorum  requirit  ratio. 
Interim  veftram  magnificentiam  enixe  oratam  habere  velim ,  ne  uUo  modo  a^grc 
ferat,  quodeandcm  nondum  inviferim,  officioque  meo  ,  in  hac  parte,  accurate 
fatisfecerim  fpero,qu6d  una  mecum  fentire  velitisj'uremerito  in  proverbium  hoc 
abiiflc  didtum. 

Sati^  cite,  modofatis  be?^  e.  -■* 

Non  folum  literar  ad  me  vcftrx,  in  abitu  meojmihi  magno  interim  fuere  folatio 
0:  Sed  &  abfente  me ,  fzepeteftificatabona  vcftrademe  concepta  opinio  magno 
me  delinivit  gaudio:dc  contumeliis  igitur,  &  Uteris  veftris,  &  veram  de  me  opinio- 
ne ,  five  judicio,cum  opportunum  fuero  nadus  ocyum  (predi61:is  ncgociis  meis  con- 
feftis)  veftr^e  magnificentix  aderojUt  aliquid  dicam:&  paratifllmus  futurusjUt om- 
nia quaj  poterofaciam,  quo  vobis  &  pofteritati  conftet ,  fideliter  &  fincere  (prouc 
ftatueram)  ad  facrs  fuae  Q/<iyf<cMajeftatis,  aegregia  fervitia,  animnra  me  applicaffe 
Ineum. 

Traga  fanuarii  6.  Anno  1585. 


(^mtereUtonof  Dr.  Dee  /.//  ABiom,  mthfftrits,  kc  3  «?< 


err, 
t:Ulc  is 
cue 


-j"  'Tr'^gA  9Ar.n0  1585. 
Januarjf  12, 

Saturday  Afternoon  !  remfived  clean  fiom  Do(5lor  Hage'^,  his  Houfe  by  BeJlem,  anH  cime  with 
all  my  HoutlioW  to  the  Houfe  which  I  had  hired  of  the  two  Sirters(nianicd}nottar  from  the  Market- 
place in  old  Trage. 

Ja.nnary  \^.  VragA  t^ttio  firim,''..,pofi  reditum. 

(JMonday  Circa  9  honm  a  media  noiile  :  Prccibiis  ad  Deum  dc  more  fufis  ,  &  invocato  lumin6 
auXihoqueDei,  adejufdcm  verttareminttUigendam.  &  cum  viruue  tia>3aiidam,&c. 

E.  K.  Herds'^  one  with  a  Vail  atorc  his  face ,  asic  were,  a  Hair  Cloth  of  Afh-  A 
colour;  I  know  him  not  yet:    Ifcea  Garden  f  ull  of  frviic,  oF  divers  fores.    Inttic  ^^vanael 
^nu(t  ot  it  is  3  pijcc  higher  then  the  reft.  On  thar  place  ftandeth  a  round  Hou(c,it  hath  '^fZV.^^^poP; 
ipur  corners,  [vvithip]  and  4  Windows:  and  every  Window  is  round  ,  and  hath  4  «''WMp<:r«e. 
^und  partitions,  round  alfo .  It  hath  4  Doorcs ,  and  at  the  Eaft  Dooris  one  ftep ,  at  j'^J^ 
l^e  South  2  fteps ,  and  at  the  Korth  3  ,  and  at  the  Weft  Door,  4  rtcps :  The  fiift  round  wh'h 
^oor  is  white,  likcChryftal,  tranfparcnt:  The  South  Door  is  ted  of  an'high  colour,  andfqustt 
Iranfparent.  The  North  Door  is  bright  black ,  not  to  be  thorough  lecn  ,  as  the  reft.  '*"^""- 
Tthe  Weft  is  green,  like  an  Enaerauld  Scone:  bo  is  the  South  Door  like  a  Ruby.  The 
Poorcs  be  all  plain.     The  Houle  wiihin  (as  it  nia^  be  judged  by  the  tranfparcnt 
Doorcs)  reeir.cthtobev^'hite,  and  empty. 

E.  if.  He  char  hath  his  ^acc  covered  ,  openeth  the  Eaft  Door^  andalithc  Koufc  , 

fecnnethtobe  onfire,iikcalutnacc.  Thcfiic  withmdcthwcvc,  and  move  about  the  Fire. 
Houfe,  and  by  the  roofe.  Nowhcopencththe  Weft  Door,  and  there  appcarcth,  as 
if  all  tfc  Houfe  werea  fountain  fullot  water.  And  there  run  divers  ftrcames  ,  in  the  Wacer. 
lamconc  water,  w'.crcof,  one  doth  go  and  come,  asit  it  ebbed  andflowcdj  which 
fticam  doth  goab'^ut  all  the  reft  ,  bythcfidesof  thcHouIe,  thatis,  asif  it  wcrcthc 
Ocean  fcacompafligt  eWorld.  Thencxtftream,  within  that,  moveth  from  the 
4fidcsward,  andm.kc  (in  manner)  4  Triangles,  or  rather  Cones,  ofwatcr,  wh<.fe 
vertices  reft  cut  oft  us  it  weic)  by  the  middle  ftream  of  water  which  occupieth  the 
middle  or  Center  of  t  he  Houl . ,  and  is  m  circular  form  invironcd. 

An  other  manner  of  ftream  there  is,  which  commeih  from  the  4  corners  of  an  in- 
ncrmoft  iquare:  ^x\iM<iX\indiametraUtcr  01  contradiBorie  wife,  toward  that  circular 
middle  ftrtara. 

The  n:.iddle  ftream  feemeth  to  ilTucout  at  the  very  Center  of  the  place,  and  to 
mount  up,  and  making  an  arch  of  his  courfc,  dothleem  to  fall  circuUrith  in  one, 
circumtcrencc.  ^ 

E.  K,  Thefircalfohaddiverfityinit. 

l\  I  would  you  had  noted  the- diverlity  of  the  fires  alfo, 

♦.».,.  Thofe  '.hat  learn  truly-,  learn  by  parts. 

E.  K.  Thecolourofthe  waterinthcCentcr,  Is  moftpurcwhitc. 

The  waters  of  that  Saint  /Indrtxvs  Cioiic ,  arc  like  a  water  f)mewhatSaffromflico» 
loured.  The  waters  of  the  Triangles,  arcfomcwhar  like  a  watrifh  blew,  which  ap- 
pca.eth  moft,  inthciopof  the  arches  of  their  flowing  : 

For  all  Ipnng  ocherwile- 

The  uttermoft  water,  is  of  Quick-filver  ibcw,  as  if  it  were  fomcwhat  mortified. 

A  In  the  figure  toUowing,  you  may  gather  a  better  and  raorceaflc  underftandingofthis  Defcrjp- 
tion  of  the  water  llreams, 

Here  IS  i 
l)lank,or  /old 
fpace  in  the 
Original  Co- 
pic:  butnoS* 
jure. 


A  a  «  .     ..       S.K, 


guie, 


356  (^ji  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABionSy  withffiritSy  &c. 

E.  K  Nowhcopcncth  the  Fuc  Door  againc:  And  the  fire  appcarcth  in  afquarc 
place.  Andthcreappeare4fircsfillingthewholsplacc, leaving  nothing  vaccuum. 

Oncof  thefc  fires  fceraeth  to  rife  from  the  Center  of  the  place  j  andto  go  in  low 
arches  to  the  4  corners  of  theHoufe. 

The  Houfe  fcemeth  to  have  14  foot  long  in  every  fide. 

Thearchcsoftheic  fires  fecmco  come  from  a  trunk  of  fire,  which  rifeth  from  a- 
bout  the  Center :  and  feemcth  to  be  4  foot  over  in  the  Diameter, 

This  Trunk  fcemeth  to  be  high  three  quarters  of  the  height  of  the  place  •,  The  place 
feemcth  to  be  as  high  as  it  is  broad. 

On  the  top  ot  this  fiery  trunkjcemeth  the  fire  to  be  in  form  of  a  fiery  Globe  .having 
6  foot,  his  Diameter,  which  firercverberatcth  and  roUeth  in  it  fclf. 

From  the  fides  of  the  Trunk  (  between  the  faid 

Globe  and  forefaid  Arches,)  goeth  ufifireTrjangi^ 

larly,  filling  all  5  faving  that  which  lemaincth  filjf 

led,  by  the  flames  of  fire ,  which  arifeth  from  thf 

""^ ''  *  . '  Globe  to  the  4  corners  of  trie  Houie,  filling  all  thf 

fptcc'in'Ihc      »  place  above  the  Ghbe:  asbytlie  figure  annexed^ 

Oripinsi  to-  more  plainly  may  appear.  ^ 

pic-:butnofi.  2j^^  iVo^e  The  colour  of  the  fire  of  the  4 af- 

chcs ,  is  very  ted }   The  reft  are  very  pure,  Aeria^ 
candent,  &c.  ^--^ 

The  Motion  of  the  trunk  fire  is  fvvifteft. 
TheOriginal  Center  of  all  thcfe  fires ,  fcemeth 
to  be  very  little. 
£. -K".  Now  hcopeneth  the  red  Door. 
J  The  Houfe  feemcth  darkifh ,  of  colour  of  the 

ft«f«       fmoak  of  a  Wax  Candle  being  put  out. 

♦♦♦♦».    B)  it  felf^  it  is  not^  but  by  the  St*nne,,  it  is  char, 

£.  ^.  It  nath  4  motions  in  it  alfo ;  every  one  n  oving  more  fwif  tly  then  the  other: 
AUtrom  the  middle  of  the  Houfe,    Three  of  them  move  arch-wife  to  the  fides. 

The  firfl  and  fecond  arifc  to  half  the  height  of  the  place. 

The  third  occupieth  the  other  half. 

The  fourth  goeth  uptight  to  the  top  of  the  Houfe. 

The  fecond  his  fpace  (that  he  ihiketh  againft  on  the  Wall)  is  doable  to  the  fpace  of 
the  Wail,  againft  which  the  firft  fmucth. 


"  Here  is  a 
blank,  or  Void 
fpace  in  the 
Original  Co- 
pie  :  but  no  fi- 
gure. 


4 


£.  K.  Now  he  opencth  the  black  bright  Door  5  And  the  Houfe  there  feemcth  full 
Earth,      of  blatk  dufl,  like  Gun-powder  colour,  or  fomewhat  of  Leadifli  colour. 

£.  K.  Now  he  feemcth  to  goe  down ,  faire  and  foftly  from  the  Houfe ,  down  the 
little  Hill ,  and  from  thence  goeth  by  a  water  fide,  to  a  Rockifti  Mountain. 

B.  K  Hefpeaketh. 

jifcefid.lamKowreniyforjoH-    Bring  om  your  C^attockj^  Spades^  and  Shovels.     Enig 

c  veri  eri. 

E.  K.  Now  come  out  of  that  Rock,feven  loan  men,with  Spades,  and  Shovels,  and 
Mattocks,  &c. 

.«.  ♦»  Follorv  Tf)e. 

£.  JK,  Now  ihey  be  come  Up  10  the  forefaid  Hill. 


♦«♦•♦ 


<^trne  9^lmon  ofDrJ^eebis  A^hns^  mth joints ^  &c.   357 


♦•♦♦♦► 


^ome  «»,  Di^  till  jost  jinde, 

E.  K.  Every  one  ilandech  diftindly  one  from  another,  and  they  dig  on  the  fortfaid 
Hili,  which  before  Teemed  covered  with  Earth  and  Grafle :  But  now  itappcarethtobe 
a  Rock,  and  they  dig  that  the  Fire  flicth  out  again  of  their  ftroakes,  and  (omchjy.e 
broken  their  Mattocks,  fomc their  Spades,  all  except  two,  one  with  a  Shovel,an  ocfiqr 
with  a  Pickax. 

The  (Workmen.    O  Lord  we  labour  in  vain. 
'    . ;  .^...    So  jott  arc  [tire  cq.  do,  MvUjjc  jou  have  better  Tooles. 
The  Wo;i^tsn,  A  las  we  labour  m  vain. 
One  of  them.  This  is  long  ot  you. 

I  had  yoH  provide  Inflrnmenti  to  labour  rotth,  but  )on  askednot  ms^  whertifi  yotifljoHtdlO" 

hour.  Therefore  hnve  joti  digged  array  that  which  yon  f aw ,  and  have  repHlfe  with  that  yoK  kjin 
not. 

'  A  d.iik  man  tliou  art, ami  hidden  horn  men, and  lo  arc  thy  doings.  One  of  them 

■•£.  ii'.,  They  flood  gazing  one  on  another.  faidcothe 

, H^ve  yo:tftot  hetttr  fnllrumiKts  ?  Ge,')rovidey('ur  [elves,  and  rettirK.  man  covered 

-;     £.K.l  hey  runne  a  great  pace  to  the  f  orcfaid  Rocky  Cave  from  whence  they  came  cio'tifo*' A(h 
•-outfirft.    Now  they  come  agsine  with  great  Beetles  of  Iron,  and  Wedges.    "Jhey  "lou. 
knock  their  Wedges  (as  we  ulc  in  Wood)  and  fo  break  off  great  Slakes  of  Stone  ,  like 
ilat:c,and  throw  it  down  the  Hill. 

Ofte  of.tbera.  W ha.C  a  thing  is  cluS,  :hac  this  Wec'g  is  broken  ? 

tyin  other   We  are  in  worfe  cafe  then  ever  we  were. 

E.  K.  Their  WedgcsareWokenj  the  moft  part,  and  the  Fire  flieth  out  of  the  Stone 
.^gr^abuixlafifC;;-.  ,        . 

The  nature  of  this  Stoneit»ot  to  cleave  :    Therefore  if  yon  hkve  no  other  Infiruments yost 

mtilh  (e.iff.         .,         I  ■ 

E.  ^'.-Ttiey arcin great difquietnefs among themfclves. 

.^,.,,Thofe  that  zo  a  Journey  ^  frovide  them  C  loathes  againjh  all  weathers'  He  that  is  worthy 
of  the  'f^ame  of  a  CoK^ftiror,  carrieih  vel'th  him  aH  Engines  :  fVhere  the  Bridges  be  broksft  dowft ,  he 
jiayeth  not ,  bicanfe  he  is  fre  fared  :  Behold^he  hath  visuals  for  time  to  com{  ,  and  his  Study  is  as 
well  the  event  ^  as  is  the  titean.  Sojhould  trite  Labourers  do  :  confidering  what  they  work-in .  For 
the  Earth  is  a  Monjter  with  many  faces  :  and  the  receftacle  of  all  variety.  Co  /jome,  fiancL  not 
idle,   Provide  by  Arts  for  the  hardnejfe  of  Natare^fiT  the  one  S'fier  weepctb  without  the  other, 

'  E.  K.  They  go  away  fpecdily. 

♦.♦..♦   They  have  their  Tooles  to  harden^  and  their  Steeles  to  temper*  It  will  be  more  then  4u  hour 
'•  f pace  before  they  return.    Therefore  may  yottfpend  the  time  inyoar^ecejjity,  andufe  the  time  of  day 
at  yon  are  acquainted  or  .iwonted.     J  alfo  mufi  ifver-Jee  them ,  orelfe  their  labonr  will  bewithofsi 
fruit ^i,.-il  ^'h    .o'A      . 

E.  K.   Now  he  is  gone. 

/!^.  Gloria  Pat  i^&F.  ScSS.ficuceratj&c.   Amen, 
— P— 

tJMond.tyy  -jrruu}  ■  •..- .    -).:,'j         j, 

,The  Ijms  day,  aier  dinner  we  returned  to  oiir  former  purpofe  for  God  his  Service,  tohisHc- 
noiwarid  Glory.     "       ■-''••-■- 

E^K.  He  is  here.  Now  the  Labourers  be  comming  out;  They  have  Wedges 
made  long  and  (har^ :  and  Pickaxes  with  three  pikes  very  fliort. 

They  fay.  Oar  cruil  is,  cba:  thcie  tools  will  ferve. 

£.  it:. ,  They  falfto  work.  They  make  like  fquare  holes,  and  put  in  their  wedges, 

and  bicak  up  the  rock  or  blackifh  flonc  (like  yron-  mine,  or  Magnes  ftonej  in  roundilh 

lumps  as  big  as  a  two-pcny  loaf,  about  two  or  three  inches  thick.   They  pick  or  dig 

*  roundabout  the  hole  tirff,  and  fo  after  ufe  their  wedges.  The  Pickaxes  have  three 

heads,  every  pick  thereof  bigger  then  the  other.    Thcfitftasbig  asonc  finger:  the 

fecondas  two  :  the  third  as  broad  as  four  fingers.  And  fo  after  the  firft  digging  they 

■  fetch  three  or  four  cakes  or  pieces  out  of  one  hole,  and  then  they  go  to  another.  Now 

.  one  of  them  is  fatn  into  the  ground ,  up  to  the  arm-pits.   Now  another  is  fain  in,  to 

the  kneeb\  No w  the  houfc  (landing  thereon  beginncth  to  fhakc,  and  waver  from  one 

fide  CO  the  other.   Now  the  menbe  gotten  out  of  the  holes  they  fluckin. 

♦»♦.♦,  i^fakj  an  end  of  yo:tr  labnur. 

Ofeof  the  workmen  to  the  guided  I:behovcchyoutofindaremedy,ort0kLUSunderft2nd  whac 

remedy 


95^  <^-^  ^^^^  ^^l^f^on  f/Dr  Dee  bis  y^dicm^  rrithjj^ints.^c^ 

remedy  we  fhallfinde,  that  you  may  dcfcend  thence:  forlo,  the  P'-il  yo  i  iaiid  in,  iS  great:  for 
th is  Rock  was  nothing  elfc  but  a  fhelljwhofe  kernel  is  a  boctomkffe  lak",  and  a  myie  quickened 
with  fome  fhut  up  vv.iter. 

♦..♦.♦  ^"^  <^**''  hither  as  Labourers^  therefore  make  an  end  of  your  wr^.  cni  f^Attd  ngt 
idle.  If  theh'Jufe  fall,4»d  ljink.,the»ts  yo'tr  LtkoHrat  an  eni.  F  ^r  the  end  of  jour  Ubourit 
the  fn!Ji!U>t{r  of  my  wiS,  atid  the  fromifc  which  pti  hitve  made  me. 

One  of  them.  Wcare  ready  to  do  our  promifc  ;  but  wc  are  more  ready  to  provide  thatyoumay 
beamongrtus;  I'o  yoti  may  be  free  from  danger. 

t.„i,Oj/i)u  of  /ittlewit ;  are  jott  Kot  A(h/imed^  which  of  yoi*  have  dwelt  wihin  thefecretsof 
this  Hill  ?  ye.t.,  which  of  yott  mteadeth  to  fulfil  his  prom'fe  ?  ftti^e  not  a  thmi  whereof  yon  have 
no  skjll,  neither  hf  J}ack.in  that  y«fi  hav^  to  do :  for  the  one  h.ith  his  revard  of  idUnefe^  and  the 
91  her  IS  coid^mned  of  rafhnelfe  :   For  why  ?    !>■  fprinj^eth  on  her  mother  tgttorance. 

T/ify/^/.  Ifwe  work,  It  IS  a^ainii  realoii.  Nichcr  do  our  tools  anfwer  to  this  labour.  Therefore 
we  had  rather  b:  idle  then  tolabour  about  nothing:  for  to  labour  in  vain,  is  to  do  nothing. 

If  we  were  detei  mined  to  work,  how  fliould  vve  perform  cur  determination^  fince  the  InHru- 
ments  of  woiki'ig  want  ? 

.....i  Gather  up  'he  pieces  of  your  fpades,  that  is  wosd^  and  may  bejoyned  together  :  The  older 
and  the  bafer  thy  are^  the  fitter  they  are  to  turn  up  fuch  fotle. 

£  K,  Tlicrccommctha  Smith  by  vviiha  budget  full  of  nails. 

Oneof  ihcmf»the  S'nitht  What  halt  thou  there  ? 

Smith.  Nailes. 

E  K4  They  be  like  Horfhooe- nails. 

«..«,  Thou  cam'fi  in ^ood  time  Jeave  thy  nails  behind  thee,  and  at  thj  return  I  wiU  pay  the:  for 
them.  See^  Gjcits  not  unmtndfHl  of  ti^.fo^  tftilf  are  the  fittefi  things  to  farther  your  work^.  Joyn 
therefore  your  fpades  andjhovels  together ^  andLibour. 

E.  K.  Nowihcy  aic  mending  liicii  fpades  and  (hovels,  the  iron  cf  them  being  all 
off  and  broken. 

Now  they  wnrk,  and  throw  away  rhc  earth  like  duityfand,  and  the  skurf  of  the 
car.h  ticket h  to  their  ipadesanc  fliovcls. 

E.  K.  Oijc  gocih  bchinde,  and  makctha  trench  tolet  the  water  out  from  the 
fand. 

One  of  them^  How  now  1  Have  we  found  harvcft  in  the  midft  of  winter? 

«,....   '*'»7  ••  tvhat  have  you  there  ? 

Oneof  thfTtt.  Marrv  ^nhcr  it^^lablafier  or  Salt. 

E.K.  Nj^voncottliciiikiiockcthapicteoff  with  his  fhovcl-end,  andreachethit 
wpto  nis<.uide. 

♦,♦..♦    Did  I  not  tell  you^fh-'t  the  Earth  hath  many  faces  ? 
£.  K.    They  work  now  cafily,  and  cut  up  Uke  Salt  tr  AUbUiier. 
Novvchey  have  digged  all  thchiUaway,  even  tothchoulc.    Now  the  houfcfec- 
j  mctiibiiiUtd  vpouihdi  tp^/te /tuff. 

One  of  them.  Itwedigaiiy  further,  we  (hall  undermine  the  hsufe. 
*»tt*Go  to  your  bufnieff'e, 

E.  K.  They  work. 

„ „..  ^oft-,  f''f^-     ^'^  labour  with  your  hands  as  foftly  as  may  be.     Stand  afide, 
E  K.   Now  he  takcth  one  of  the  irons  of  their  fpidcs,  and  letmeth  himfclf  to  pare 

the  tides  of  the  FoHnaAtien  underthchoufe,andit  Iccmethtobca  vcflcl  of  tranfpa- 

rcnt  glaflc,and  having  fire  within  it. 

riinorDomini        ♦♦•<♦»  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  burning  fire, confumeth  not^  but  re^ifieth  the  body  ',  theolddroft 
it  wipeth  away,  and  the  daily  i>ffl"Xion  of  the  flefh  and  fin  it  f  parateth  from  the  foul. 

Behold  ( I  fay)  heliveth  not, but  unto  whom  life  is  given  :  neither  is  their  any  joy,  but  it  is  af' 
cending;  for  the  end  of  joy  ts  glory  ^  but  glory  is  the  conf'.mmationof  defire,  and  the  beginning  of 
felicity.  No  m.m  entreth  into  oy^  but  by  life  :  neither  is  there  any  life,  but  in  the  fear  ofQod. 

^htfoevr  therefore  hath  the  fear  of  Cod-,  let  him  draw  ««r,  and  come  hither.      Number  ex- 
Afcenfion  ceedeth  not^  but  by  unities.     Netther  is  there  any  multiplication  bm  by  order.    For  the  root  of  num- 

ber ii  one.   yind  things  that  afcend  are  digntfiidby  order.     Out  of  thisveffel go  foHr  vents afcen- 
Scpirst'on        ^'"^  into  that  /{oik^,  whuh  is  the  Root,  which  is  this  building. 

It  isfaidy  Behold  ;  let  my  fpirit  enter  in,  let  there  be  Separation  made  "Within  the  houfe  of  the 
"^^orib  jhat  the  earth  may  he  divided  into  her  members.  Curfed  be  that  body,  that  is  not  divided, 
according  to  profffrnun,anfa!eringto  the  Dtvffifin,  for  (he  hath  yet  not  cafi  off  thejhape  ef  darks 
nejfe. 

E,  K.  There  runneth  up  fire  into  the  houfe,  from  out  of  the  round  glafTc  vcfTel 

undec 


(9^ true  Relation  ofUr,  Dee  bis  ABions^  mth  joints y  &c.  355? 

iindcr  the  foundacion  ot  the  houfe.  And  chat  fire  makcth  a  great  noife  (thiough  the 
black  bright  or  marble  door  to  be  hard  oncly.)  Now  that  North  door  is  mighuly 
thrown  open,  and  there  appear  inthchoufclikc  kernels  of  apples,  and  flimc  appear- 
«h,andwatcrthinnerthenflime,andthereappcarcthpurewater,  elfc.  Now  there 
coramcch  together  ftufFlike  yellow  earth,  which  the  fire  wrought  out  of  the' black 
earth:  And  the  pure  water  runneth  into  that  yellow  fluff. 

,„„.0f  that  tdke  apart. 

E.  K.  The  fire  recurneth  back  again  among  the  ftufFin  that  houfe,  and  there  appear 
of  all  Creatures  forae.  Creitioii 

Here  is  Creatisri,  and  it  is  the  firft. 

£.  K.  Now  he  takethalumpof  the  earth  lying  by,  which  was  thrown  up,  and 
he  brcakcch  it  into  fix  pieces  like  round  Balls. 

E,K.  Hctakechathinglikeavefrclofiron,andputteth/«ftfin*^  mixmre  efjcl- 
Ispteartb  andrv^'er.  And  ic  lookcch  now  like  graffc  mingled  with  water. 

\tt„*T^hfH  art  firong,  and  wilt  be^et  a  flron^  Child. 

E.  K.  Now  he  piicceth  out  the  earth  which  he  put  in,  and  it  is  a  lump  of  gold,  lie 
givcth  it  him  tha:  ftandeth  by. 

....../*  '•'■f  the  feeds  of  the  earth. 

E.K.  Nowhetakeththcfccond,andputtcthitin. 

^Qirritptitnimthief ^  for  he  haih  robbed  thee  of  thy  befi  OrnAtHOits^  for  thoHArt  vtaktr  iti 

thefecond. 

E.  K.    Hetakethitout,and  it  is  as  if  it  were  pure  filver. 

„,„^fVhere  there  it  double  I  heft,  poverty  infiteth.  But,  mtwtthfi  anding,  Thoff  art  true;  for 
thoHgiveji  unto  every  thing  as  much  as  hi  defirtth :  Thift  openefi  thegreatefi  habiUty  and  Jlrength 
of  thy  power,  netfuch  as  n  hath  been,  but  fuch  4S  it  is. 

E.  K.  Now  he  putceth  in  the  third  Ball. 

That*  muft  tarry,  for  thoft  art  of  an  harder  di£efiion,fiuce  thoU  art  the  third.  Content  thjf 

felf,  for  thou  art  not  an  Inheritor. 

E.  K.  He  takcth  it  out,  and  giveth  unto  one  of  thcai  that  ftandeth  by ,  that  is  a  red 
metal  like  copper. 
£.  K.  Now  he  takcth  up  another  of  the  Balls,  and  holdeth  it  in  his  hand. 

^^^^^Behold,  thy  mother.  Heat  isgone,  and  the  enemy  of  life  entreth  ;  for  he  that  pajfeth  his  mid" 
die  age,  decayeth,  and  dnnveth  to  4h  end. 

Behold,  thou  jhalt  find  a  Step-mother,  for  thou  cam'.fi  out  of  time, 

E.  K.  Now  he  putteth  k  into  the  veflcl. 

,.,.  t.  Let  cold  cover  thy  face,  let  the  North  truly  beget  thee-,  for  thou  art  an  enemy  to  thy  prede" 
ceffors.  But  thou  art  of  great  vertue  ,ftr  of  thy  excrement  (hall  vertue  receive  dignity.  ,  /Ind  thj 
vertue  (hall  be  a  gar  land  to  Nature  ;  for  thou (halt  be  vijihle  when  the  other  are  filent  :  the  Seas 
P)aU  not  hinder  thy  vertue,  notwithftanding,  thy  vertue  fhal I  differ  with  the  Seas :  For  as  they  dif- 
fer-, [o  (halt  thou, 

E.  K.  Now  he  takcth  it  our.  It  is  a  ragged  thing  like  Smiths  cynder  of  iron,  and  ie 
hath  holes  in  itj as  if  itwerefpongy. 
E.  K.  Now  he  taketh  up  another  Ball  of  the  earth :  he  putteth  it  in. 

„»„♦  Thou  art  tradable,  and  like  unto  an  obedient  daughter:  But  thou  jhalt  be  the  fifth  i»  the 
fecondi  and  an  Injlrument  to  the  fir jt. 

E  K,  Now  he  takcth  it  outj  it  is  like  unto  a  white  whet  flonc,  ashcfhapcd  it  at  the 
p  utting  in,  it  is  like  Tynne. 

E.  K.  Now  he  taketh  up  another  Ball,  and  putteth  it  in. 

., ...Thou  art  the  lafi  that  hath  inhim/elf  and  by  htmfelf  his  being'.  Behold  thy  face  is  Uke  unto 
I  vax,  but  thy  inward  bowels  are  like  unto  the  anger  of  a  Serpent ;  Many  (hall have  thee,  but  fhaH 
)  hot  know  thee. 

One  of  them  by  faid.  Will  you  give  me  nothing  ?  i 

E.  K,    A  great  cloud  covereth  them  all,  the  ftoneand  all. 

A  Ic  durcd  Ibaquarter  of  anhour, 

E.  K.  Now  appeareth  another,  none  of  them  before  appearing.  He  fccmeth  afar 
off  comming,  and  higher  placed  then  the  other,  it  fcemcth  lobtURIEL,  he  hath 
his  face  covered  wicha  Skarf  of  black  hanging  down  to  his  breaft. 

URIEL  BleffedarefucU  as  are  not  offended  in  the  little  ones. 

'  £e.  K.  He  fpeaketh  now  a  language  which  I  underftand  nor.] 
lift.  I  E  L .....  For  the  Angels  of  the  God  of  Righteoujneffe,  are  his  little  ones :  and  fuch  as  k^orf^ 

mi) 


560  (^  true  relation  ofDt,  Dee  his  AUions^  mtbj^irits^  &c. 


InChtiftwe 
ma'  bccoiii: 
Innocents, 
and  be  born 
anew. 


Tempt 


ation. 


lings. 


Pra  etit. 


Mir.ijl/i  icr't' 
tain. 


0  magna  mi- 
feiio'di.i  lua, 
D$mine. 


Proplicti* 

1590 
1591 

Ttic  Hiibour 
we  are  in. 


not  ftu  ofCPHCHpfcence  by  confent  (  /  fpe<ik_  this  for  your  underjtandh:^. )  Take  heed  (therefore) 
that  yon  offe/id  »ot  yoiirfelves  :  for  you  mujl  become  little  ones  '•  and  the  pojver  of  the  htghefi  mtifi  «> 
bo;i»d  in  yoit. 

He  that  vjfeudeth  his  brother^  ojfen^eth  God  :  b:4t  he  that  ojfendeth  his  crvn  inmce»cyy  is  abhor' 
red  of  ihe  Lord.  Lo  yow  <«rf  ThechilciiCR  of  Piomile  5  and  111  youisthe  myllery  of  a  great,  and 
iTiigh-y  Seal.  Therefore  flttdy  to  humble  your  fehes  1  /'"'  Hufnility  is  the  Root  of  Innocency,  But 
{tny  brethren)  Innocents  by  nature  yon  cayinot  be  ,  neither  can  jouferve  (^od  in  the  intaainntion  of 
clean.iejfc  of  foitroivn  ftcfh.  Now  (therefore)  (ince  joit  are  fiefhly  ^  will  y,u  become  innocent  ?  Or 
how  can  joii  feek^th'it  which  N<i!ure  hath  /«//? 

The  Scriptures  teach yo:s  ;  That  in  Chrilt  yon  were  born  a-nem:  ^And  by  him  you  may  become 
Innoceins  ,  when  in  hitK  yon  are  cle-infed.  Therefore^  if  in  him  th'fiate  of  your  Innocency  remain., 
if  in  him  you  are  renewed,  and  made  clean,  (being  rotten  and  defiled,)  why  feek^jou  not  him,  as  you 
fhould  do  ? 

7^j  man  thatf-eketh  the  bright  neffe  of  the  S'inne,  goeth  under  the  Earthi  Neither  creepeth  he 
into  unknown  Ca'ocs.  The  Tygres  feek^not  their  prey  upon  Earth,  where  the  waters  are  not.  Nei- 
ther the  Eitgles  upon  rvaters. 

No  moic  ougfic  you  to  gmdg  that  the  Lord  temptech  you,  nor  to  be  oSended  when  the  World  of- 
fencieth  you. 

Isit  not  faidunto  you  ,  that  you  (hall  fight  a  great  fight:  fVhat  fight  is  it  my  brethren  :  But  a 
.^atcelagainlitheVVorldhngsand  the  Devil? 

//rfr«»/a/o«  f^.i.'Kingslliall  be  off.'ndcd  inyou. 
The  Sunne  ceafeth  not,  yet  hs  fh.iUceafe^yei  he  Hiall  not  be. 

The  Lights  of  Heaven  kef  p  their  courfe  ;  but  they  (hall  ftddenly  fiagger  ^  and  forget  their  long 
vorne  way.  Much  mare  jhall the  wick^dnefe  of  thofe  that  rife  up  againft  you  ,  have  an  end  ,  for 
in  them  is  no  courfe  but  err  or, and  the  fire-brandt  of  Sathan,  prepared  in  their  own  hands ,  for  their 
own  defiruElion. 

Behold,  they  (hall  contend  again fi  you  and  (h.-tll  defpife  *thee:  But  lo  I  have  bleffed  thee  above  them: 
for  thou  (halt  fight  againjl  them,  and  fhak  overthrow  r/)fw  :  that  my  iViiwf  w^^  ^f  magnified  in  thy 
mouth  amongit  the  multitude  ofche  linfull. 

Behold,  they  are  oppofite  unto  thsc,  becauft  they  are  oppofite  unto  me  :  for  I  have  gathered '.hce 
from  amongfi  them  ,  and  they  are  become  thy  Enemies.  Since  therefore  they  are  thine  Enemies 
(i^ecaufe  thou  mufi- fight  againfi  them:)  Be  not  grieved  therefore  when  ^tiv  wickednefle  doth  of- 
tend  thee  ;  But  put  on  the  armour  of  patience-,  and  Become  innocent. 

Dofi-  thou  think^  that  from  the  Heavens  cancome  the  dew  and  life  of  all  things}  Even  fo  think, 
alfo, that  from  tu  commeth  ho  untruth. 

Be  therefore  innocent,  and  be  not  deceived  by  thefiefh;    ^afi  feafon  afide  ,  covered  with  her 

Cloitd:    tylndliftupthy  felftnhim,    unto  him  {I  fay)  that  hath  lifted  ihtt  {torn  xht  Oooresof 

Death:  tak^n  thee  out  of  the  hat\dsot  Buccheis,  and  continued  thee  for  a  member  or  his  Glory, 

'Behold,  J  fay  umo  ihcc,The  brightneffe  of  Truth  over-fhadoweth  thee,  Jftherefore,thou  dwell  in 

truth,  why  fhouldeft  thou  be  afraid  ?  Confidtrir.g  that  fbe  conejuercth  and  refijteth  aH  her  Enemies, 

Behold^  the  World  defpifeth  you,  you  alfo  Jhall  defpife  the  fVorld- 

tvhen  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  poureth  hit  wrath  and  vial  upon  the  Earth,  and  the  enemies  of  the 
Sonne  of  God,  runne  in  among  thefheep.     yi^'hen  thefelf-fame  Plague  that  was  in  the  land  of  Pha- 
raoh rameih  in  the  Houfcs  of  all  that  dwelleth  upon  the  Earth,  fuch  as  the  Lord  abhorreth.    fVhen 
theLordwith  his  hand  fha  II  gather  up  the  fruits  of  the  Earth  from  them,    I*  here  then  fhaU  be 
their  honors}   What  then  fhall  be  done  with  money  ;   with  that  harlot  and  firumpet  of  the  Earth}  Of 
what  v,ilue  fhall  their  love  be  then,  cr  who  (ha/l  regard  their friendfhip  ? 
In  thele  4  yeares  that  are  to  come,  fhall  all  thefe  things  come  to  pajfe. 
ty^nd  this  great  ]oy  fhall  be  turnedinto  teares  of  B'imfione. 
Why  ?   you  of  little  faith,  you  know  not  how  often  I  have  been  amongft  you :    neither  the  Harbor 


that  I  have  thruli  you  into.     Notwnhfiandtng  you  murmnr  amongfi  your  f elves.   Bm  fl'ick^fafi  tut- 
to  him  that  leadeth  you  :  For  he  ts  a  fure  G'^ide, 

jind  be  not  af>aid,though  the  Earth  open  her  jaws  againfi  you,  for  why  ?  Iwillbleffe  all  things 
you  take  in  hand,  (faith  the  L»rd,)  and  my  Ipirit  fhall  dwell  amongft  you. 
A   May  I  ipcak  } 

E.  K.  He  curnith  him  to  you. 

A    How  fhall  our  new  proceedings  joync  to  our  old  beginnings  ?  O  God,  our  guide,light,  flaffe, 
fii  If  Id,  and  com'ort,  &:c. 

URIEL.  Behold,  I  teach  you,  before  I  correQ  :    But  the  'DoBrine  I  teaeh  is  Humility  ,  Pati- 
ence [hejeemeth  to  fpeakjo  oneabove,]  and  the  fear  of  wrath  to  come 
ttAfter  which  manner,  I  have  taught  them,  by  thee  A  . 

Therefore,  if  thou  teach  Obedience  through  thefpirit  of  God,  appearingunto  thee ;   B'  ihott  alfo 
Patient  and  Obedient  -•  -^nd  Humble  thy  felf  onto  them,  for  my  fake.     Net  with  the  opening  of  any 
Mpomifcd    i'*^  >  fieither  with  the  Counfailes,  that  I  fh»S  deliver  thee :    jS«f  yfith  A  ready  mind,  Obediently, 
the  none.       definng  to  petfornie  that  vvhich  thou  haft  promiftd  in  mc. 


To  RtdoUh, 
and  t««f. 
Note 


^true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  A&ionsy  mthf^iritSy  &c.  3  6 1 

/  am  fufficient  Jlren^th,  and  will  be  thy  buckjer^  and  if  they  intend  evil^  it  (hall  refi  upon  them ; 
yea  when  they  imagin  it-,  it  (hiH  friz,e  within  them.  And  thy  g'^ings  in  and  out  fhall  be  lafe  amonglt  ^    .     ^ , 
them.     Bm  l>eh»ldf  1  teach  ttnto  thee  away, whichthou  follovnejl  not.   when  thou  ntindefi  to  do  any  Y^^„ 
thing.,  in  the  name  ef  Ggd,  to  hts  honour.,  to  the  help  »f  thy  neighbour .^  or  thine owncomfort '.  Go  a- 
bouc  ic  whatfoever  it  be  :  and  begin  a  Labour  ;  Do  that  thing  chou  intended.     .And  fee  that  you 
joyn  with  one  cpnfent  towards  God  and  the  hnjineffe  you  are-occHpied  in. 

Then  cry  out  to  God  for  Komfort^{oi  light,  and  rr»eunder(tanding.    Andit  it  Jhall  be  givenumo 
thee  abundantly.      For  Lc,  J  fay  unto  thee     [£.  7C.   I  Undcrftundhimnot  HOW.]      I  will  o- 
pen  my  hand  unto  thee.,  and  bi  merciful  unto  thee :  And  whenioever  you^M/>«/'the  VVood  toge-  Together, 
thcr,  I  will  defcend andgive^.rc. 

Behold^  I  ks'p  backache  refi  of  mj  me f  age  for  an  ether  time.  Which  fhall  be  ready  for  you  when 
I  find  joa  ready  to  receive  it- 

A  I  requeltedto  know  how  I  fhould  deal  with  th'  Ambaflador  oi Spain,  or  the  Ernperor,orC»r- 
t/«*;Secondly,your  KJl  L  E  here  given,!  underihnd  it  not.For  I  dare  not  begin  any  labour  withoLt 
counl'el divines   Mans  imngination  is  lo  weak,  &c. 

URIEL  Thou  hafi  thofe  that  are  fent  unto  thee  here  for  thy  inflrnHion^  which  fhall  by  degrees 
lead  thee  intothedeg^rces  of  that  thou  art  to  do.  .  ByJegrees. 

Brtt  It  is  one  thing  ta  receive  Corn^  and  abundance  of  grain.,  by  the  bleffing  of  Cody  in  the  return 
of  an  year ."  and  an  other  thing  tu  do  the  workj  of  the  Apojiles. 

For  the  fpirit  of  God  is  twofold  :  working  by  information  ,  ani  influence  Ccelefhiai  through  the 
grant  ef  God  his  good  will  ^  in  the  mimjl-erj  ot  his  Angels  to  the  information  of  fuch  as  are  hti 
faithful  and  chofen :  An  other  thing  to  be  infpired  from  God  himself-,  in  his  holy  fpirit  ,  imedjatcly 
comforting  and  knittingfVifdom  together  with  you  ^  beyond  the  power  that  is  giveuunto  his  An- 
gels. L 
J  have  fpiken  unto  y  ou  a  found  and  true  doHrine,  and  have  given  you  not  fiefhly  but  Celeflia 
counfel  :  Apply  your  f elf  unto  it-,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  leadeth  you.  tAs  for  thofe  wic^d  men 
(that  Ambaffador  excepted)  our  underflandi«g  hath  no  name  of  them  :,  PVe  remember  themnot-^ 
neither  limit  any  thingfor  them.  But  tf  thou  tn  thy  i\m^hc\zy  and  innoccncy  canft  not  deal  with 
them^  the  fault  rejteth  in  thy  own  faith.  Simpliciry 

I  am  gone.  Innocency. 

A  Deo noftro  Omnipotent!  Immartali  &  Regi  Gloriae,  fit  omnis  laus,  honor,  graciarum 
adio  &  Jubilatio.         t/4men. 


January  16.  -j-    7ri*g£. 

^if</«fyy<i^,  Manehora  9 -jfere  t 

A  PrecibusadDcumfulis,utnobifcumproccderet  infua  mifericordiaSc  lumine  yeritatis,  non 
in  parabolis  foliim  &  imgmtatibus ,  fed  clara  &  naanifeUa  veritate,  modo  qui  illi  maximc  pla- 
cet, &c. 

E.K.  I  fee  the  man  again  and  the  houfc:  the  man  fecmcth  to  be  covered  on  his 
face,  and  fo  over  with  a  vail  of  hair-cloth  to  his  middle. 

A    When  it  fhall  pleafe  God ,  all  vailcs  and  ^y^nigmata  fhall  ceafc. 

^t^.^iyhatfeever  Iteachyouhath  a  Myffery-     Andl ama  (Jiiyftery  iu  my  felf.   Even  fo  al  Myfteiies, 
things  that  you  learri  of  me.,  you  mu^  be  content  to  receive  as  myftical  injhruilions  comprehending 
ferfell  truth  ■>  and  to  be  k^iown  to  f^ch  as  are  true.    Some  there  be  that  h*ve-,  and  have  nothing:y  ea 
though  they  have  all.,  for  All,iscoateined:     But  the  myfieries  of  God  4re  infinite^  and  his  grace  is 
not  to  be  determ  ined. 

A  Thac  faying  is  dark. 

That  which  is  All.,  is  conteined.  Beleeve  you,  that  we  give  holy  things  ttntt  Swine  ?  Or  open  the 
finger  and  worknsanjhip  of  God  unto  Sinners}  God  forbid.  Moies  faw  God  but  his  hinder  parts. 
The  Prophets  were  ac(juainted  with  God-,  but  myflicatlj.  The  Apofiles  with  the  Sonne  of  God  infha- 
dowsy  and  their  own  impotency.  Tea,  I  fay  unto  you  ,  that  fhe  th4t  lyeth  in  the  lap  of  her  Mother, 
knoweth  not  but  by  degrees-,  for  it  is  the  manner  of  Gods  Wifdom,  both  immediately  and  by  us ,  to 
keep  l>ack  his  VVildom  from  Hell  and  corruption. 

Therefore  murmur  not  at  that  which  you  receive-,  for  it  is  noty  our  own.  Behold,  if  you  have  bet- 
ter., you  need  it  not  .-for  it  is  vanttte  to  feek^  for  that  yau  have,  ffell.,fince  tt  is  given  you-,  Conjider 
iphat  it  IS  J  that  is  given  you.    Conftder  alfo  herv  it  is  given  ytu ,  and  by  whom. 

A  We  know  by  whom,  as  our  confciences  and  faith  teach  us. 

♦„♦,.  O  yoii  of  little  under fl:anding:  Who  is  he  that  can  and  hath  to  give.,  but  God.,  Jefui  Chrift 
the  Sonne  of  the  living  God,  unto  whom  all  things  are  given  in  Heaven,  and  in  Earth,  if  therefore, 
■All  he  his.^  then  hegiveth.  And  if  you  receive  it  hardly  ;  Confidcr  how  hardly  you  ought  to  deliver 
it  again.  .^    . 

And  if  it  be  a  fire  reviving  the  form  of  all  worldly  things :    Then  cafi  it  net  to  Swine  :  neither  ^^^^'^  vivip- 
■  yet  worjhip  it .    Behold,  y»c  -re  men,  But  in  having  it  you  muft  ceale  c©  be  men,  for  by  it  you  enter  i^py,^  j._ 

B  b  upon  pijw-^. 


5  6 1   <?>^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  A&ions,  mthjpirits,8^c. 

findhy  it  pfifacend  into  the  true  kitovUdg  of  our  fare-fathtrs^and 


Green. 
Red. 


upon,  and  into  all  tmmortality  ; 
flate  of  Innocency. 

But  I  hear  a  voice  ;  /  ttill  depart^  and  come  again. 

£.  if.  Nowallisvaniihcdaway.  .  .  r    u /-  j    ' 

A  We  read  over  the  prcmiffes  to  our  comfort  and  inftru6lion  ,  webeleech  G«d  tocontinHC 
liis  graces  and  mercies,  on  us,  and  inus,to  his  honour  and  glory,here  and  forever. 
£.  A".  Now  he  is  here  again. 

The  will  of  God  tt  «/>««  »»?,  ar.d  fnatcheth  m  unto  other  things. 
Tomorrow  in  the  morning.,  with  empty  Bellies,  /  nvill  tell  yoH  what  it  is  jou  feekj 
A   Fiat  voluntns  Dei,adeiuslntidcm,l-ionorcni  &  gloriam,  nunc  &:  femper.    Amen. 


Note  this 
VISION. 

Earth  of  a 
iiwny  colour. 


Water. 


1  AWomsn. 
i  A  Child. 

3  A  Wmian 
with  child. 

4  An  old  man. 


An  Angel. 


AnOathi 


a-.K 
ihi 


thought 


-j-    Traga. 
Antio    1585-    Janst.try  \'j. 

Thnrfday.  Mane,  circa  hovam  %.  \-  .  ■    u  •        •• 

Oratione  Dominica  finita,  &  alia  btevi  cjaculatione,pro  lumlne  &  Tcruate  Dei  okinendis,&c. 

Po(t  quartam  horse  partem,  renit. 

£.  A".  Here  he  is  now. 

A  Ulorja,  laus,&  honor  fit  Deo  noftro  Omnip»tenti.  ^men. 

......   Hoxoiir  aud  thankjgivtng  tvtth  lorvd  voices.,  beunto  our  Lord  fefus. 

A  Amen.     £.  A'.  Amen. 

£.  A'.   He  hath  a  great  heap  of  earth ,  or  little  hill  natural  ^jf  him  of  orange  or  Ursnj 
colour.)  dravpingfomtwhat  t»a  Litntawnj. 

£.  K.  A  Woman  commcth ,  and  with  a  fpadc  diggcth  about  it.  Now  com, 
mcth  a  child  (a  man-child;  out  of  a  dark  place ,  with  a  fire  (hovel  in  his  hand. 

The  WommhathtdVcn  away  all  the  edrthi  and  t  here  afpearethrvatcr,  where  the  earth 
%vas.  The  boy  caftcth  out  that  Water  with  the  fire  (hovel,  ihe  Woman  laughcthat 
that,  The  Woman  is  in  green  clothes,  and  the  boy  in  red. 

Now  comraeth  a  Woman  with  child,  or  with  a  great  belly  ,  in  white  clothes ,  (he 
pucteth  her  hand  down  to  the  ground,  and  pulleth  out  a  littte  Glaffe  full 0f  red  oil. 

Mow  commeth  an  old  man  with  a  Crab-tree  (taflfe  on  his  backj  his  clothes  of  mot- 
ly  colour.  This  old  man  takeihthc  GlafTe  from  the  Woman  by  force,  with  his  lift  he 
brcakeih  the  Olalle,  and  all  the  oil  runneth  about  his  arm  ,  and  eat  of  that  til  did  feem 
4  ieo* /«  f«»»^  a  very  little  Book. 

PUiner-)  trueri  or  better  can  ntthing  be. 

'^r^:.  He  faid  this,  looking  on  the  Book. 

Tht['e.iov\xfoMKd,btttnoneIIADFRUITybuttheIaJl^.     Hear  and  vfrite  the  my 
fteries  of  God,  tvtth  humble  hearts,  not  fittings  but  kjieeling.,  before  Sanftum  Sanftorum. 

A  I  kneeled,  and  lb  prepared  my  I'clf  to  the  writing.  In  the  Name  of  Jefus  our  Redeemer,and 
the  Wild oiT"  eternal  of  God  Almighty. 

£.  JC.  He  kneclcth  himfclf. 

e\  K.  Now  gceth  fire  out  of  his  mouth  ftrcamingly,  hcmrncrh  himfelf  tothc4 
parts  of  the  World,  (pouting  our,  or  breathing  fire  vehen.cncly. 

E.  K.  Nowcommerh  onclikc  anangcl,  hovering  ovcrhim  inthcairc:  and  bid- 
dcth  him  Hold  up  his  hand. 

Jlottflj-tlt  fvoear  by  heaven  and  earth  .,  and  by  him  that  fitteth  en  the  Throne  y  that  than 
fl)alt  open  thy  month.,  andfpeak^Ko  more  then  is  contei^ed  in  this  Bookj 

£,  K.  He  delivcreth  him  a  Book  out  of  his  Bofom. 

„.,..  I  have  fworn. 

£*.  K,  The  Angel  is  gone.  Now  truly,  the  place  is  holy. 

E.  K,  He  holdeih  the  Bonk  in  his  hand  which  the  Angel  gave  him.  ThcBookisas 

if  it  were  oi  Ivory  bone.  The  Book  is  open,  he  looketh  on  it.  The  letters  fccm  to  be 

blcwiih. 

Thereis  filence  inusy  and  m  the  heavens, 

h.k.  Now  all  is  full  of  (moak. 

A  Oia'fi  paululum  tacitus. 

E.  K.  Nowitisclc.iragain.     ,.,♦.♦    HefeemethtoreadofthtBtok. 
TaksofjourDlafod. 

E.'ic.  The  book  fccmeth  to  be  written  io  the  holy  Charadcrs. 

Dlafod  dignified. 
E.  K.— 


"  -^"*^        <J\fy  brother,le4ve  of  thy  chi/dffhnejfe:  murmur  not,  thou  hindrefi  mi' 

imftrti  9p-       ^  ^  ^^  .^  ^^^.^  .^^  ^^^^^^      ^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  ^  clccr again.    . 


i^^i 


(^  true  reUtion  of  Dr. Dec  bis  ABions,n>ithffh  its,  &c.     }6'z 


,  ^nd'L\x\v\n.\xs  or  from  due  degrees,  .,^^.,^  ~.  7 

Read  it. 

^  I  read  it fake  off  your  T)lafod  dignified^and1.\xm\m\i^orfr9m  due  degrees', 

E,  K.  He  fcemcth  to  labour  much  abouc  the  reading  ot  ic. 

♦.... .    Gather  or  t^ke  fierce  degree, 

[/  feel  »o  power  J  therefore  have  patience.^ 

„   NotmthJiandiHg, work.it  diverfe  dayes  multiplying  four  dtgefthKf^  '^■i 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  in  a  Cloud  again. 

.f.»,.   Tr^ltthat  it  may  he givenuntome  ofCod. 

....♦♦  «  -^"d  d^uhU  then  Dlafedy  and  thy  Rod  1  n  r.   \_It  is  a  word  which  cannot  he  founded  1 

AMuaKbcRlodnr?  .h„,«Uerwn,d 

,„.,»  Loot.Mout  you^jor  Satan  would  hinder  you  oj  (jods  benefits, 
„  ......  R  /  0  d  »r. 

,, Diligently, 

......  PrAy,that  you  way  underfiand, 

A  Wc  prayed. 

„   For^until  thou  watch  fo  continuing, 

E.  K.   h  Cloud  Itandeth  by  him,  and  novvcommeth  before  him  as  other  times 
before :  and  then  gocth  away  Irom  before  him  again. 

„ it^a  holy  hour  defc'endeth,  *■ 

yVTio/f  f/j/Zj-j/fr/ wf//,  for  here  you  may  be  cafl  over  flioes. 

V  E.K 

This  Cloud  is  in  thee.     A  VVe  had  talk  of  the  forefaid  Cloud. 

„  .V.i..  Of  every  work^there  afcendeth  one  Audal,  and  fo  every  Law  R  1  o  d  n  r, 

E.K.  Now  he  is  covered  in  his  vail  or  cloud  again. 
E.  K.  Prayed  a  fhort  fervent  prayer,  whereat  1  rejoyccd  much. 
E.K.  Now  there  commcth  a  beam  from  above  into  his  head  as  big  as  my  little 
I  finger. 

,)♦.♦.♦♦  ey^ndpurpofe  DUfod-,   takj^im^t  Image.,  andhave  the  proportie>i  of  am»J^  glorioxi  ^'  K^- 

umixture  Audcal  and  alfo  Lul  j.     Continue  and  by  office  feek_  R  n  o  d  n  r  hackward  by  the  red  di-  ^  '^'^u^'^' 

\gtflton.  But  hebythecohtmonorred  Darr  dothgathermo/i-  ripefimrkj,  purge  the  lafi  fortene  arms  abroad 

\vtell  fixed.     Thenthe  four  through  your  \K\odnr']  fwifcly. 

[^Ifatd'^KoTitan  fnijhed  more  together  at  the  loivsr  body  by  one  degy-eeT^^  be  by  you /or  him  iFo'tene'} 

hold  It,  for  him  in  one  of  them,  —       '  <^This  w?s 

E. K.  Now  helycthdown proftratc.  '"^^^^  ^  ^°'- 

m  .1    /  ..r    I  a    r  ■  reeled  aiter- 

„  ,..»,.  ^»f'i  of  thelafithmg.  „a,js. 

E»K. liefpeaketh 

„  ......  Inhim  become  his  red  and  hlghefi  degree  of  his  refurrtUionthrsHgh  coition.  ^*"^^' 

E.  K.  Now  there  commeth  a  great  thing  like  a  fircjand  covereth  him. 

Now  fit  up.  , 

A  We  did  rile  up  from  kneeling,  , 

„  ..."  .After  a  while  I  come  again, 
......  There  is  the  whole  workj 

E.  K.  Here  is  again. 

,,,,,,  Brtng  forth  the  bookjf  Enoch.  Uber  Enoch 

......  Read  your  leffon A  I  read  the  former,  Take  OH  your,  &c. 

Gather  your  fix  words-,  /^words  confifi- of  6  letters, andtwotf  /{,  ShvioTii 

R  1  o  d  n  r  read  that,  in  the  upper  afgle  defcending  in  the  firft  fquare*  ■. 

Jt  is  a  great  thtng  to  know  which  is  the  firjt  table  there  in  Nature . 

"Deliver  the  Book^  here.  " 

A    I  gave  the  Book  to  £.K. 

......  Look_wherethou¥..K.feefi the letterclear. 

E.  K,  looked,  and  faw  a  (park  of  light  upon  R,  then  on  Lj  &Co 

A  He  was  led  by  light  appearing  on  the  letters  to  read  the  fix  words ,  '■ 

'Dlafod.^  Roxtan.,  %^*dnr.,  nAudcali  Darr.,  Lul».  SJx  yyo,-(}s, 
♦,♦♦..  Tiere  /V  ^atenurius  in  Circumfcrentia,<J«</^uatcrnarius  in  Centre 
There  be  the  4  mediating  wayes  to  the  Center, 

Allthat  may  be  fpoken  in  that  you  caU  Animal.,Vegetabletor  Mineral  ■workjnanfhip  of  Nature  Animal, 

is  here,  as  in  a  part  of  tha  four.     This  farnowymoreas  youdefireit.     But  that  you  may  fee.  I  ixa  Vcguable, 

iCompanwnwiththere/}.  m<:<al 

■r:\,      u  Omnevcrunt  . 

J:..  A.    tic  IS  gone.  .jjijg  ignco'-iiiii' 

Bb  7,  A  Bene-      -.^,,  ,  ..- 


7,6 /\.      (?yf  trne  Relation  ofDc.  Dee  hit  AUions^a^ithj^iritSy^c, 

A  Bencdicamus  Dommo  Deo  notho  OmnipotentijPatri  Filio  Zc  Spiricui  I'andto,  Armn^ 

famarii  i8.  +  Pra£a. 

f  ri'^^y  Mane  horam  circitcr  8  £ 

Orationibvis  fufis  ad  Deum,  ut  MyReria  nobis  exhibita  (hefterno  die)  explicentur ;  &  ut  decrafta 
literx  cortice  luccus  &  fpiritus  vericatis  manifeHus  fiat,  &c.  tandem  apparuit  ille  cum  velo  cmereo. 

E.  K.  Here  he  is,  upon  a  green  cndlefTe  plain  field,  and  as  I  fee  abroad  in  the  field, 
lo  the  Heaven  appcareth,  andailcircumftanccs  ot  the  air  abroad:  but  mji  thinkcth, 
that  I  am  from  the  earth  aloft,  and  fee  all  under  me,  as  if  it  were  in  a  valley. 

t**,,,^of  what  have  yon  learned  out  of  that  Leffon  .? 

A  We  perceive  the  grace  and  favour  of  God,  to  deliver  us  Myfteries  in  outward  terms  determi- 
ned, but  in  the  fruitful  inv^'ard  verity,  as  yet  unknown  to  us. 

,,.^,,  Behold  I  have  delivered pn  (through  the  ^Villof  God)  the  true  perfe£land  moft  plain  Sci- 

icuean       ence  or  underHandin?  of  all  the  lower  Creatures  of  God  :    their  natures,  fellowfhip  toeether,  and 
fiuitot  rhetor-  -_,,..  ^7  <      ,   ■    c       r  m  id  j 

mcr  Uflons.     perfewi  knitcmg  together,  which  is  rourtold. 

Thefirfi,  the  ks'tttin^  together  of  celejlial  influence,  and  the  Creatures  belom.  The  fecond,  the 
centra  of  every  body  EjJ'ential,  The  third,  theeor»bin4ttonof  many  parts  or  bodies  concurrent  to  one 
principle.     The  lafi  the  true  uje  and  knowledge  Q£.  K.  He  fpcakcth  3  language  which 

e/  every  (abjlance  to  be  conjeyned  and   difiribw         |  cannot  foUnd  after  him.  ] 
ted.    Take  a  paufe — • 

A  Weread  thepremiffis,  and  diicourfedofthem. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  here  again. 

4»»..t/«  the  Lejfon  which  I  have  taught  you  is  this  knowledge,  tvith  the  refi  contained. 

.,  Thereforefeek,,andtHr>t  theeaahuY^idedow'T],    Labour,  that  you  may  receive  fruit,  for  unto 

him  that  wo;  kith,  and  hathj}renath,fire»gthjhall  be  given,  and  the  rervard  of  a  Tvorkmau.  Many 

years,  the  daughter  nf  long  time,  are  not  neceffary  to  the  opening  of  this  Myjttry.    Many  moneths 

have  noihiH^  to  d)  h-re  :  For  lo,it  is  a  labour  of  one  ds),for  >n  one  day  you  may  underftandto  tear 

•  this  Lejfon  tn  pieces.,  and  to  underfiandwhat  every  rvordjignifieth. 

Note  But  here  ts  to  be  eonfidered .,  in  the  learning  of  this  Le^on,  three  things  :  the  plact  that  every 

The  place  of  word.occupieth  -  the  place  that  every  letter  oecupieth^aftdthe  nnmber  amd  place  that  every  word 
wordb  and  let-  and  letter  is  referred  unto,  for  here  place  and  number  are  apart,  and  beat  an  Image  of  the  work 
5*"-  that  they  tntreat  of. 

The  nuaiberof  ^f^r  >.umber  andpUce  muft  bejoyeed  together,  and  thereby  fhall  jiu  tafte  of  that  which  follorveth, 
jg,.j_  frue  vpifdome. 

The"  joyning  Be  therefore  diligent,  and  pray  for  the  grace  of  god,  that  you  may  learn  and  underfiand.  The 
of  muiiber  and  manner  of  mansteachinglook^mt  for,  inme ;  for  Ih^ve  nothingto  do  with  man,  Sce^  haw  yen  can 
place,  dtg.-fiths: 

*      E.  K.  He  is  flept  afide.  ^  I  difcourfed. 

£.  K.  He  is  here  again. 

•  ......f  Notvhtarofifhat  Ifhallfayuntoyou.     Jn>illopenuf>to'yoKaMY{\crY,tht\itY  and  foHK- 

dai  ion  into  the  entrance  and  knowledge  of  the  divine  wifdome,  delivered  uute  you  in  a  Science  pal- 
p.'.ble,  contcined  ih  letc-rs  and  woids  unoiderly  placed,  as  a  Chaos :  and  therefore  not  to  be  undcr- 
ftood  but  by  order  to  be  reduced  and  drawn  into  their  places,  and  thereby  to  be  underfiood, 
C»baliftically  For  you  have  not  a  letter,  nor  the  him  of  a  letter,  nor  the  place  of  a  letter,  but  they  are  all  coun- 
tedwith  us, as  the  fiars2reco\inK(i\NithGo(i,  The  letters  andwords  workjnginto  all  reafon  ,  as 
thefiars  dotnto  the  lower  creatures :  Therefore  humbly  receive  that  which  I  have  to  fay  unto  you, 
or  fhall  open  unto  you  as  obedient  Scholars,  kneeling. 

Firfi,a  little  with  me  praife  God—       E.  K.    He  Is  Otl  his  kneCS. 

E.  K.  pray  ea  the  1 42  Pfalm,  Dontine  exaudi  orationcm  me  Am,  and  I  with  heart  con- 
fcntcd,  and  greatly  rejoycedintheaptnefTcof  the  prayer:  ^%E.K.  Iiis  cafe  chiefly  re- 
quired, and  mine  alfo. 

..  ..  I  come  a^atn, 

E.K.  He  is  gone. 

A  We  conferred  and  confideied  many  things  to  the  praile  of  God,  and  the  contempt  of  the 
worldly  wifdorre,&c. 

E.  K:  Now  he  is  come  again. 

£. /^.  Now  there  commcth  a  white  curtain  before  him. 

.....   Now  hear  my  zoice,  for  thou  canfi  net  fee  me,, 

110 
One,     Seventy  three,    67,     29.     3^0 

lijad—   -6  I  read it  mnfi  be  izo. 

35* 


Q^true  9^elat^n  o/Dr.  Dee  bis  ABions^  mthj^irits^  &c.  3 6*^ 

E.KA  hear  a  voice,  as  if  baskctSjana  earthen  pocs  were  thrown  from  place  to  place, 
from  one  fide  to  another. 

lOJ 

78-     Jr50      95.      loo.     60.     9T.* 

K,  K.  I  hear  as  ic  were  a  whiftling  very  bafely  or  lowly,  vvhu,  whu,whu,&c, 

..„..  Say  what  jo'.t  have.    A  I  lead  all  the  1 2  numbers  — . 
Afake  a  note  there.  ,C^  I  m;ide  *ns  you  fee  before. 

59.         E.  K,   Had  a  very  heavy  thing  on  his  head :  and  in  his  cap  it  fecmcd 

as  if  it  would  have  crept  into  his  head. 

5t.  •  52.    8?.     6.     -J.      12.     20.     88.  * 

Note  that.   A  Sociid  I,  asbefoie,  with  *  asafuU  point,  Notabl;% 

Tal^e  thoH-S.'K.alfo  pen^  ink^,'a>}d  paper,  tind  note  the  numbers  dlfo  ^  that  joti  may /tgree, 

E.  AT.  Took  pen,  ink,  and  paper. 

fyrite  than  E.K-  alfo  the  fiumhe/s  that  he  hath  written. 

E.  K.  Wrote ou: ojl the formernunibcrs. 

5   II.       I?'.     2,3-.     62.      ^±     141.     9.     81.     18.      26.      54.      123.    105.     14.    27.      £IJ. 

lU-    «  37-    lO'    <54.    46.    59-  .  ■         • 

A   Ibecame  herealmolHn  a  fiiund  ,  I  wis  forced  to  rile  from  kneeling.  Our  guide  and  School- 
mater  bad  me  go  away,  and  £.  K.  flioukl  write  out  the  re(t  :  But  it  was  not  oui;  friend  that  lo  bad.  ^ 

i;9.        22.        3.        45.        128.         %6.       71.         68.         58.        14^.        121-  H?.  ^^^,f^^.  f- 

24.       fi-       dp.        55.        19.        15        25.         37.        31.        T7.        76.-      57-        7J.  40.   hJ.'^eceivi 

41.          79.           IT9.         8.          95.           113.          9?.         84.          7°'          ^P-           3*  »?•   afcermygo- 

122.           136           71.           2.           1^8.           43.           109.            106.           lifi-           116  131.    ingjbyrtiewof 

77.           4.           103.             Id.            124.            30.            10:.           no-             50,            48.  89.    brighclighc 

44.          ,7        loi.        82.        129.        130.          90.          34.         98.         99.         ^5.  ^S.   -Prcfc^'jn^^ 

IJ2.  .        114.           47.           144.           107.           131.        61.        133.           134-          ^°  ^°-  upon  his  pa- 

53.         75.            35-         9i          "t'           21.          127.       108.         S***          ^1^'  **5'  per.    Bucit 

104.        87.        42.        94.        38.        85.        74.  wataSophi- 

Thou  £.  K.  halt  all  done.  ft'"'  "lew ,  a  5 


may  appear 
aftcro 


After  Dinner  ws  repaired  to  our  bufincffe,  and  by  and  by  apparition  was  made. 
And  luminous,  all  one  word. 

•vr 

Nowfetygar  niimhen.,  as  they  follorv  in  order^fo  orderly  sver  tvery  vford, 

A   Together  is  to  be  taken  for  one  word. 

Itisfo. 

A  Therefeemtobcjufl:  144  accounted  words. 

Non  bring  every  word  confetfuently  in  order  by  MUmber  dirc^ii^g  y"*-     iyhenjoHha,Ve  p' 

nijhed  and  confidered^  after  z  hours  I  will  help  you  again. 

5   Mup  be  in  the  place  of  iX.,  and  mujl  anfwer  And  luminous. 

3  „.,,^  The  number  over  Comoton^mufl  be  i;  and  not  x-^i.Set  all  togithety    1  will  help -^QMt 
errors. 

A   I  cannot  do  it  well  this  night. 

......  As  thou  wilt-,  andwhen  thou  wilt.,! am  ready. 

A  Omne  quod  vivit  relonet  laudes  altilTimi.  tyimen. 


+  Tragd, 
Saturday. 
Januarii  1 9     Mane  hora  9.     InlpeSo  Lapide  fiatim  apparutt,  qui  ante  heri.Poft  preccs  ad  Deum. 

Hear  what  I  (hallfdy  untoyau.     The  iVerd  and  Teftament  of  Jefus  Chrift  ,  the  bread  of 

Itfe,  left  to  the  Comfort  and  infirstii-ion  of  the  faithful-,  is  fuch  41s  infermtth  according  to  the  digni~ 
ty  and  pureneffe  of  Spirit  in  htm.,  which  feekeih  to  be  informed.  For  why,  the  Holy  Ghoft  helpeth 
notfuchat  are  Lepers ,  neither  healeth  fuch  asarejtck,^  Hnleffethey  come  feekjng  him  truly  for 
^medicine, 

tJMany  read  the  Scriptures  after  the  fame  manner.,  {my  brethren)  but  they  are  confounded ,  be- 
eanfe  they  feek^their  awn  ghrj.,  and  not  the  glory  of  him,  whereof  they  intreat.  Herein  doth  Sa- 
tan rejoyee  that  the  f^Vord  of  God  is  become  an  inftrumcnt  mto  him  y  tofpoiltht  life-)  {andfiate 
to  come)  of  man. 

Herein  dtth  he  rejoyee,  that  with  the  fame  meat  that  Sti  feedeth ,  even  with  the  f elf  fame 
he  confoundeth. 

Fof 


q  66   (oyf  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  Anions ^  mitbf^irits.&ic.  ^ 

After  the  fame  manner  hath  he  etone  unto  joh.  ^    ^ 

A 1  was  very  Tor  jefitrdjij^  whe*  he  faw  thee  (a)  Uheur  andfirnggli  vith  infirmides  or  :he  flefh,  he  thought 
fick  fuddenly,  ^  fit  time  to  thru/t  in  himfelf,  and  of  the  fame  bread  tb^tt  I  have  liven  jo:;  {in  the  pvfer  0fCl^ifi) 
and  Wis  con-  fg  „f,t]i^  himfelf  an  iafirument  hy  tHrnisg  of  himrelf  into  our  brightnefic,  to  lead  je$i  into  errour. 
lea  "'off °  ^'■*'^  ''^^  unxftrthy  are  -joh  of  this  mijior  dtrknefe  :  Read  joh  not «» the  Seriptures,  that  he  pertjh- 
ed  that  moved  himfelftoftay  the  Ark^unbiddtn  ? 

The  Hand  doth  not  the  part  of  the  bodj^neither  can  he  that  is  a  Setr^ar.d  the  member  of  anOthef> 
CS  a \ufquirr<     .^rii  I    ^.       r  f       ^jr    i^^^  f.^         member. 

,m:iumpiiii.       /p;  *«w  thee  [EX]  ,     ,     .        l        l- ,.  •     ' 

Becarife  thou  jejierday  woulJefi  effer  upfacrifice ,  wouldeft^  put  thy  hand  to  that  which  is  no: 
-.         ^      thy  office^  and  th4it  in  the  abfe>:ce  of  h:m,\s'Wicn\sthf  body  :  t!:eref ore  hath  Satan  deceived  thee, 
mntu^im-       ^"^  "^  the  fat  her  of  hers  hath  in  a  Irffoi  of  truth  ledyoufa  f-ir  into  errour,  that  )ou  vftll  never  fiy.d 
gjtur  fiOprii.     the  tfay  otft,  if  you  fhofild follow  thofe  injlruclions. 
For  vfhy  they  are  falfe,  and  of  the  Devi!. 

H'hen  thou  jtert  commanded^  f'*J'''-g-,  VVrire  ;  then  write:      But  when  thou  hafi-  no  authority  'gi- 
Mercy  and     vtn  thee-, iifttrp  not.    But  notvetthftanding.^  Humble  jo:ir  felves  before  the  Lord^  and  kneeling  before 
G:3ce.  him^  Receive  you  Le{ronstose:her,youaiebutoneboc]v. 

A  Thanks  be  unco  our  God,  which  hath  delivered  us  from  the  {hare  of  the  wicked  hunter,  and 
is  ready  to  lead  us  into  the  path  of  truth.    • 

......  ^0'"'  write  both  together,  ai  yoHJhall  hear. 

£\  In  the  Name  pf  Jelus. 
, The  Place  is  holy. 

I.    lo.    ^7-    ■^9.    120.         £.  ic.  Now  I  hear  as  the  falling  of  a  block. 
.•.      .*.       33-     78-     140.     95-     yi-     60.     91.     ;9.     51.     ^5-     85c     6.     7.     12.     20,     88. 

•  •  •     • 

/  II.     13.        5.       62.     IZI.    63.     I2J.     141.    9.     81.     18.     26.        54.     123      128.      14.      27.      115, 

66. 
•'.  I3J.     I37i     •^0     <54-     59.     139.     2J.     3.     23-      iC).      85.     72.     62.    45.     142. 

.:         s:.^-     i4>-     24-     3^.     58.     JV.     I)-     ^5-     37-     3^-      "7-     7^-      57'     ^9'     4°- 

41'     79'     15'     8.     96.     113.    93.     84.     70.     35.     32.      17.      122.      135,     49. 
J38 
,•       •      2.    jg^i-.     4J.      109.     ic6.     ii6.     \\6.      131.     11.     4-      103.     92.      19.     124. 


•  .• 


30.     102.       110.      5c.      48.     89.     44.     97.     lei.      82.      129.      130.'      90,      34," 

132. 
87         98:      134.       S7.      2S.       112.      114.      47.       144.       187.       132.        61,      al.      ^g: 

•.•[45j      71. 
.•,         42.     8c.     55.     66, _     r}2-      16.     III.     133      127.     108.     56.   118.   119.   104.  loo» 

7lr    P4.     58     85.     74. 

A  holy  muftbeallone  word-,  andfo  Sfe  wjiere,  A  moft^ 

j^^jg  A  I  find  here  8  numbers  donble,  and  9  numbers  between  i  and  144,  not  fcnred  with  words,and 

one  to  want  of  144. 

......    ff'hat  is  it  to  me,  if  Satan  confound  jou, 

A  As  I  put  my  trutt  in  the  Alnjohty  power  ofChrift  our  Redeemer,  fo  I  naoft  humbly,  heartily 
and  conlhntly  befeech  him,  and  verily  believe,  that  he  will  confound  and  utterly  extermbe  all  Sata- 
nical  temptations  in  thefc  afticns,  dfe  are  we  nothing. 

Befeech  God  to  forgive  you  jourjins,     I  will  vijit  ytu  at  the  fourth  hour  after  dinner, 

—  -  Deo  Gratias. 

Saturday, 

After  dinner,  circa  horam  4. 

A  Comtor:  lis,  O  God,  with  thy  truth.as  we  intend  truly  to  bc  thy  faithful  and  devout  Sex- 
vants,  tjlfitte  limam. 

E.  K.  Here  he  is. 

1   .• .;.  Tou have  29  twi ce,  the  laS-  zg  t»ufl  clean  be  put  oftt. 

a  Tou  have  twoT>\iiQdt  yonmnfi  put  the  latter  out, 

^'K.  He  is  gone. 

E.X, 


oJtrne  relation  ofDr.Dtt  his  ABiom.mihfprits,  &c.     i&j 


E.K.   He  is  here  again. 

^  5   Have  you  not  this  word  double? 

^Kttwo  words  next  to  tfiAt,  Dlafod  and 

Look  out  the  HHmber  of  6j 

Put  next  to  it  lis A  The  wicked  enemy  prompted  falls. 

^  Ton  have  two  lo 

Make  the  /aft  66. 
5   Ihelafi  -]■]  mufi-  ie-]X. 

The  refi  wi/l  prove  it  f elf. 

J^ow  fet  the  numbers  and  gather. 

rhink^Mot  that  I  can  erre;  tf  there  be  a  faulty  it  is  yours. 


Saturday^ 

After  drinking  at  night,  hora  -j. 

,tt,ttTour  words  and  numbers  mufi  be  all  ofie^  or  elfe  you  labour  in  V4t>n. 

♦,♦♦♦.    !•  2-    3- 

A  Which  be  the  words  anfwering  to  tho^  numbers  ? 

,...„  Take  Common  Rlodnr  /  will  teach  you  w  further. 

A  God  be  thanked. 

*.„,Take  Common 

I  fpoke  to  thee  in  the  beginnings  of  Darr  And  And ,  over  the  which  there  mufl  be  \l\  and  i  a  j 

Ifo  inJhruSied  thee  in  the  beginning. 

But  it  mufi  be  for  a  new  Revolution,  but  not  for  this.  ^^0,^; 

Put  out  thefe  numbers, let  them  fall  elfenhere.  For  anew  Rc- 

Note  that, in  the  Margentffor  the  beginning  of  another.  volution 

-  The  beginning 

of  anochcr. 


I 

Take 

2 

Common 

^ 

Audcal 

4 

Purge 

f 

and 

6 

Work 

7 

It. 

♦,♦,»  Dlafod    and  then  together. 

«,„»  121  <'wrDhfod,<««<ii25  «wr'thcn. 

,»»»♦  Now  doubt  wt. 


jarmartt  20. 

Sunday  after  Dinner,  about  3  of  the  clock.  As  we  fat  together  in  the  Myftical  rtudy,  and  the 
Shew-Jltne  being  t*fore  €,  K.  our  School-mafter  appeared  therein. 

♦,  ♦.»  Behold  I  open  unto  thee  this  key,  which  is  not  worthy  for  the  unworthy  ;  neither  are  the  ««- 
worthy  worthy  of  it.  Teafuch  it  ^,  as  never  cntred  i«to  man  before  ;  but  the  body  it  is ,  with 
theimagewhereof  they  have  brought  forth  many  things-i  to  the  fraife  of  Gody  i/»  the  Timber  of 
his  fVorks. 

Take  Common^  &c.  Take  hold. 

Write  it  in  a  paper  by  it  felf. 

N»w  you  have  that  you  fought  for  (yoit  may  apply  it,  and  find  your  ew»  errours)  which  yoH  are 
unworthy  to  receive  any  fuch  thing. 

A  Gloria  laus&jubilatio  fit  Deo  noftroakiffimo  Domino  Dominanttum&  Regi  Regum  ira-* 
mortali.  Amen. 


fanuarii  21.  -\*  PragA, 

tJHonday. 

Mane  hora  9  j. 

A  Oratione  Dominica  8c  aliis  precibus  ad  Dcum  fufis,  pro  ejus  gratia  &  auxiIio,per  fideles  fuos 
Miniliros,  &  noftros  conatus  promovendos,  &c. 

E.  K.  Here  he  is. 
,     A  Bencdidus  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini,  cujusnomenfanflificeturSc  exaltctur,  nunc  iC  in 
svum  per  omiies  gentcs. 

♦f»t  %fmember  that  yc  ft  are  ftejh,  and  by  yottr  wfrkj  defirve  nething  at  G«ds  hands  t 


%6S     (?y{  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^withfprits.^c. 

New  then  if  yett  be  ma,n^  then  are  you  of  earthy  earthy.  "But  according  to  your  (tmilitude^  i,*'^f' 
ted  in  the  image  of  God  in  his  Sonne  Jeftts  yon  are  heavenly. 

But  behold^God  is  oppojtte  unto  you  ,  and  hisfpirit  cleat  eth  not  unto  you  ,  in  that  you  are  flefh^in 
that  you  are  earth-tin  that  jou  are  filthy  :  <«  thM  you  are  the  children  of  Satan  ,  und  thttt  therefore., 
take  part  with  him  agaiKJl  Ckrtfi  anointed  of  the  Lord. 

£.  K.  He  is  out  of  fight  now. 

Now  if  JOU  be  "ppofire-y  or  more  contrary  tt  the  image  of  him  which  dr»elleth  in  you,  *f  yu  dwell  i» 
him  what  do  yee  here :  why  prefume  you  to  enter  within  the  Doores  of  him  to  whom  you  are  an  adver- 

faryf 

Herein  you  (iocw  your  ignorance  ',  and  the  Ittmptihneffe  of  your  fragility  .^  in  that  you  feek  of  him, 
unto  whom  you  are  odious ^or  crave  the  bread  which  is  dm  .:;>d  necejfary  for  his  children  andfcr- 
fank  vants.  But  hear  my  voice,    Pacntibus  dat,  kd  pcccntibus  hliis,  &  fervis,  led  non  alienis- 

Notwnhjlanding^  of  his  mercy,  and  for  that ,  he  ^nerv  before  the  beginning  of  all  worlds  ,  the  cor- 
ruption of  you  r  vejfelsi  and  remembring  that  you  have  been  of  his  houfhold  -,  mercifully  he  hath  hi- 
therto winked  at  yottj  andat  yourprefumptien,  and  fed  you  with  that  bread,  which  is  not  the  bread 
of  (inners. 

But  now  confidering  that  you  continue  in  your  wic^edneffe  ,  continue  in  your  rebelUw  againfl  his 
Uponconditi-  cMajefiy,  and  fight  dat/y  under  his  banner  which  ts  accurfed,  he  takjth  his  breaU  from  you,  pjut- 
*""•  tethuphis  Doores  againfi you  ■,  warrethhts  fervants  againfi  you,  and  is  become  a  fire-brand  of 

wrath  againfi  you. 

But  here  you  wtllfay  :  were  not  we  of  thtfe  number  unto  whom  he  made  a  prorfi'fr^you  were/o.But 
ttpon  condition :  That  if  you  would  bridle  your  tongues  from  fpeakj^g  evil,  a>:d  become  wholly  hts. 
But  you  are  neither  his  ,  wor  bridle  your  tongues:  but  Ipeak  Blaiplicmy  bcrorc  tlis  Lo;d  ,  andihz 
Meffengers  of  his  light  and  covenant.  Therefore  are  you  not  inheritors  of  his  premife.  Behold,while 
the  grapes  grew,  and  the  corn  ripeneth,  God  did  expeB  your  return,  fo,  no  hour  is  unacceptable  un- 
to him. 

But  MOW  the  hiirvefi  commeth  that  the  corn  mufi  be  cut  down  and  the  grapes  prejid,  you  are  no:  as 
you  laid  you  would  be,  nor  ns  you  promifed. 

Therefore  are  you  exclude  d.,  for  in  the  vineyard  there  commeth  no  jlrangers  5  norinthisharvefi 
commeth  any  hirelings,  for  it  is  not  the  harvejt  of  man. 

Now  either  fulfill  your  promtfe  andreturn  from  the  multitude  of  your  finnes :  or  murmur  not, 
though  you  befhut  out  of  'Doores. 

The  earth  of  it  ftlf  bringeth  forth  nothing ,  for  it  is  the  lump  and  excrement  of  darkueffe-,  whofe 
Hell.  bowels  arc  a  Kuning lake. 

But  where  the  heavens  yield,  and  the  Sunne  poureth  down  his  force,  (he  optneth  her  f elf,  and  be 
commeth  fpongy  ,  receiving  mixture  to  generation,  and  fo  is  exalted  above  her  felf  ^  and  bringeth 
forth  to  the  ttfe  of  man  :  Even  fo  the  Body  when  it  lyeth  in  the  puddle  and  hotchpotch  of  his  earthly 
filthineffe^  and  darknejfe  m^kjng  himfelf  equal  with  beafis  :  whofe  dignity  is  not,  bm  in  their  ufe. 

E.  ^.  Now  he  is  here  again. 

,„.,»  Two  things  you  have  to  be  infrutiedin  ,  t»RIodnr,  andinthe  Law  of  Coition  and 
Mixture. 

the  firfi,  is  the  infirument  workjng ,  and  drawing  things  together  of  one  nature.  Thefecondis 
the  bounds  and  termes,  wherein  every  mixture  confifteth,  and  beyond  the  which  it  cannot  ^0, 

Thefirjl  of  ^  parts  >  every  part  conteining,conteineth  his  contemtd double. 

The  firjl  ii  Tepens ,  this  teacheth  the  reft. 

Thefe  two  things  can  I  open  unto  you  in  two  revolutions',  which  it  but  one  dayes  work.. 

But  new  I  ceafe  toofen  any  more  unto  you  till  I  fee  the  favour  of  God  more  open  unto  jou. 

yffter  7  dayes  I  will  come  again,  until  then,  [neither  am,  nor  fpeakj 

A  The  mercies  of  God  be  upon  us ,  now,  and  ever,  i/fmeu. 

-j-  Tragi,  ^efus  Mercy. 

tMonday. 
Januarii  28.        Mane,  liora  i©  fere.  "" 

Oratioiie  Dominica  &  aliis  pro  mifericordia  divina  ,  fufis  precibns  extemporandis. 

After  diverfe  pitiful  complaints  of  our  frailty  ,  and  calling  for  favour,grace,and  mercy,  he  appea- 
red. 

♦♦,„,  Let  the  heavens  prepare  themfelves  to  hear ,  the  earth  fcatter  her  felf  before  my  voice  J 
for  J  am  the  Trumpet  of  the  Higheft  ,  and  the  pierctng  Spirit,  difperfed  into  all  creatures,  which 
are  from  the  beginning  in  Cod,  and  made  to  his  glory  ,  and  the  ufe  of  man-kind ,  that  in  man  he 
might  be  glorified, 

^ive  ear  thirefore,prd  up  your  garments, and  fcatter  your  hair  abroad  beftre  the  Lordywhichit 
glorified  in  me  ,  snd  through  vihem  Ifpeakj  ^"^  thefe  are  my  words. 

Har- 


(^  true  relation  of  Dr, Dec  his  A5fiom,mthfpirJtf,  &c-     3^9 

Harden  not  yoffr  hearts  againfi  the  Lord ,  neither  exdc  your  f elves  above  hint  that  hath  created 
JOH.     B^f  humble yoHr  [elves,  and  conjider  yoit  areflejh-,  niortal,  tranjitory-,  and  full  of  finne. 

i^y  brethren',  rMj  brethren^  ftnne  and  fle(h  appear  not  before  the  L»rd  ^  neither  fuck  as  arejin- 
MtrSy  and  flejhly  veffils  apt  or  fit  for  the  Lord  to  dwell  tn. 

Underftand  what  ths  Lord  isy  and  how  gr:  at  he  is '.  afndg  to  ther^fckedy  great  and  terrible  •   a 
father  to  the  holy  and  Jlncerefuji--,  full  of  mercy,  and  loving  kj»d>iejfe. 

If  ^  on  now  therefore  be  holy  ,  and  put  on  the  garments  of  Iny:occ:jcy  ,  and  walk  before  him  in   [f 
righteoitfnejfe ;    Then  look^to  have  the  reward  of  Children  •-,  Then  look^far  his  fatherly  merc.et,  and 
loving  kjndneffe  ;   Then,  then  rejoyce at  the  oaruieiits  of  glory  prepared  far  jo  t. 

Buc'it  yoK  feek^him  tniadv^mcnt,  and  flir  him  up  to  wrath  and  a  nge-  .-  if  yon  catife  him  to  call  the  But  If 
terrible  thptnders  (provided  for  the  wicked)  about  him,  in  the  mnfl  furtotts  flames  of  his  indignation, 
to  gather  you  together  likj  vhirl  iVtnds :  f/^yoK  draw  his  hply  Ai'geltrom  you  ,  and  fp/i!  you  of  your 
Mrmes:  if  he  fit  down  upon  the  mouth  of  vengeance,  and  arm  ii'nfelf  withrighiemfnejfe  agamfi- 
your  wickedaeffe. 

Then  look_,for  the  horrible  and  Htfpeakjble  reward  of  the  wicked,  an i the  confumingfireof  Ju- 
fiice,(harper  then  the  two-edged  fword. 

pyh}  hath  flood  before  the  Lord  tnjuffice  ?  or  who  dare  (Quarrel  -with  the  highefl  ?  whdt  flefh 
hathfeen  the  Lgrd  in  his  Majefiie  ?  or  can  appear  before  htm.as  riahtco-is  ? 

.  Tear  your  [elves  therefore  in  pieces,  and  f all  do-wn  before  the  Lord ,  worfhip  him  as  a  futher,  and 
hecome  his  children :  for  his  Judgments  (my  brethren)  are  ten  ib!e,  and  his  wrath  ts  vtchout  mea- 
fure^     Many  wayes  you  are  bound  and  tyed  unto  God  ;   yis  by  difciplwe  you  learn. 

But  three  [pecial  wajet  you  have  been  advanced  by  /.  im  more  then  your  brothers  or  (i  fieri  have  binx 
The  fir fi  in  the  vifitation,  wherewithal  he  hath  comfortedyou ,  and  exalted  you  above  thefforld- 
lings,  ot  his  good,pure,  and  jult  Miiuliers  ot  eccrnity  and  light. 

Secondly,  in  that  with  his  own  hand,  yea^wi.h  the  beckj>f  his  own  eye,  beyond  the  miniflryof 
Angelifhshath  divers  wayes  protcdttd  you  :  defended  yon,  yea^andfnatchedyou  from  imminent  and 
violent  envy,  and  prepared  deftruction  of  Satan,  at  home,  abroad,  and  divcrle  other  wayes ,  fecret 
4nd  not  to  be  opened. 

Lafily,  that  by  their  meanes  and  minijlry,  which  are  his  good  Angels,  and  minifler  unto  him  ',  he 
hath  guarded  you  from  the  wickedneffe  of  your  own  Country  ,  aud  hath  brought  you  ,  ready  to  place 
jouinto  the  lapof  aVirgi>i,  with  whom,  ifyou  cake  part,  you  fhall  afccnd  into  that  Hierufalem, 
which  fhall  defcend,  and  there  live  for  ever,  .  ''  - 

Theietore  ought  you,  above  all  men  ,  to  life  up  the  horn  of  the  Lord  ,  and  to  blow  his  praifes  a- 
broad. 

Therefort  ought  you  when  others  are  full  of  idleneffe,  the  dalliances  offtnne ,  to  humble  your  felf 
tffon  the  earth  before  the  Lord,  and  to  praife  his  Name^  --^ 

Therefore  ought  you,theugh  allficfhforfookjhe  Lord,  rind  cried  out  againfi  his  anointed ,  tefiand 
fiifiy  againjl  the  malice  of  the  hills,  and  to  be  without  fear. 

O  my  brethren,  therefore  ought  you  {invery  deed)to  fhake  off  your  wickedneffe  ,  and  to  cleave 
.  (^before  the  Lord)  unto  the  innocency  of  Angels  ,  delighting  in  the  one  as  an  eternal  food  ,  dsfptjing 
'the  other  as  a  fire-brand  for  Hell- fire  and  the  wicked. 

A  O  Lord,  Vellc  adell  nobis,  aflabfquetuo  fmgulari  favore,  &auxilionou  pofllimus  perficere, 
quod  ita  debcmus  prxibre.    Igitur  Deus, 

Lo,behold,  your  humility  is  not ,  you  are  fealed  to  the  fVorld  ,  and  according  to  the  World  mea-   ^_rl/,- 
[ure  the  Lord  ;    Therefore  with  the  fVorld  jhall  you  be  judged.  Therefore  fhall  the  Lord  ft  in  judg- 
ment aga'mft  you. 

A  O  Lordjwhat  prevaileth  us  that  we  arc  are  born?  or  \Afhat  prcvailcth  us  that  we  have  heard  of 
the  myfferies  and  promifes  moft  merciful  of  the  highelt,  as  concerning  our  Ele^ftion ,  if  the  Lord  will 
not  help  us  in  our  g:cat  frailty  and  mifcry  .*.  where  fhall  we  become  on  the  face  of  the  earth?  &c. 
,,»♦,.   Hear  me.     /r^r  wr »«  5p/m,  for  it  is  not  in  thee-    A 

£.  K.  Now  a  flame  of  fircflafticthinmy  face. 

♦♦♦♦,.  Oyeeof  little  faith  10  yee  of  little  faith  I  0  ye  of  little  faith  \  I  have  gathered  you  to- 
gether  asTrophets.     Put  you  fiie  from  me.    If  I  had  known  orforefeen^  that  to  Jit  on  the  feat  of 
Kings ^  had  been  meet  for  you  •  to  have  had  habitation  or  dwelling  ^ith  the  crafty  Counfellors  of  the 
Eart  h  would  have  made  J9U  fit  for  me.    If  I  had  feen  that  pride  of  the  loath  fume  heaps  of  money 
iE gathered  together,  could  have  fantiifcd you  before  me  ;    Then  csuld  I  have  lifted  you  up,  placed   v 
jou  amofgjl  the  worldly  wife,  or  epenedunto  you  the  lowth  of  the  Earth.  But  /prowa'tf  J  you  againlt   ^hifjum,i\:e 
Kings,  agamd  Counfellors,  («jfi«/x/?  the  Govcrnours  oi  thetVorld,  toopenm'j   judgments ,  «t/>^  ro   lowih. 
bear  n'//««']/i'''/ ray  power.   But  [mce  you  are  [of »tl  of  rebellion,  and  will  rif^  up  againjl  the  Lord  A 
that  made  you,  difdainto  take  part  with  hishoiy  Spirit,  that  you  may  be  rectified  audi'anftiftedto  Ourofficeap- 
the  performance  of  his  holy  will;  Hear  lu]^\\o\.\  my  voice.  poime  . 

Take  whom[oever  thou  wilt,  inwhofe  fdce  the  Lord  fhall  feem  to  dwell ,  and  place  hint  with  this       Ve  voz-t 
Seer, andlet  him  fiandfeven  times  by  him  :  I  will  take  the  fpirit  from  him  ,  and  will  give  it  unto  ffcifccndo  vi- 
another,  unto  the  fame  that  f^andeth  by,  and  fhall  have  fower  to  fee:  andhe  fliall  fulfill  my  word)  ^'"'^  ^  ^.''' 
that  I  have  begun.  But  tfthoit  do  fo,take  heed  th/it  upon  his  head  there  come  mrafor;  But  keep  him  YHmt,"^'"" 
forme.  <yC-  / 


370     (^  true  Relation  ofDt,  Dee  his  ABions^mthfprits^^c, 

/come  again. 

A  O  Lord  God,  thou  haft  coupled  us  two  together,  in  thy  clefiion,  and  what  the  lord  hath 
joyned,no  flefhly  fancy  of  mine  (hall  willingly  feparate.  But  Lord,  if  it  be  thy  will,  feeing  he  is 
fohardtogivecredittothy  holy  meflages,  wichoutfome  proofinworkfirft  pafled;  as  for  example, 
this  doftrine  of  the  Thihfophersfioae ;  that  fo  he  may  come  to  be  allowed,  though  he  imitate  Tho- 
T»AS  T)jdimus  in  his  hard  and  How  belief,  or  credit  given  to  thy  Minifters  in  this  Adion.  Lord, 
proceed  herein,  that  he  may  perceive  thy  power  and  mercies,  &c.  And  Lord,becai!rc  he  is  to  re- 
ceive the  pledge  of  thy  mercies,  and  myliery  of  the  heavenly  food,  we  would  gladly  hear  of  that 
holy  SacrATitent  fome  dilcourfe  for  our  better  inftrui5lion,and  his  better  incoursg.ment  to  the  my  If  e- 
ry  receiving. 

A  After  a  good  while,  in  which  mean  time  we  had  difcourfcd  of  the  Sacrament  receiving,  and 
of  the  Philofoj^-hers  flone  making,  he  appeared. 

E.K.   Here  he  is  now. 

♦....ATofff  vfell.  vthat  I  fuj  untojoH. 

£,K,  He  opcneth  his  face,  he  putteth  on  a  white  garment,  he  takcth  up  the  four 
corners  of  his  garment,  and  putteth  them  under  a  broad  girdle  he  hath;  on  his  head 
is  nothing,  but  hiir  rtddijb  n>averwg. 

t,t„Gad^  in  the  begtMnin^^  of  J^thtng,  bj  himfelfy  made)  created,  and  gathered  together  nil 
Creatures  ;    of  Nothing,  becaufe in  h:mfe!fhe  is. 

E.  K.  Heholdethuphishands,andlooijeth  up  to  heaven,  and  feemeth  to  pray  fx- 
tefttii  mAntbfti. 

...♦.  Jf  he  Be,  then  doth  it  fo/larPi  that  nothing  is,  b^t  that  which  is  (jod.  But  God  made  not 
nil  things  (made  and  create  i)  of  himfelf  neither  out  of  himfelf :  therefore  rf  nothing, 

Underjhand  then  fore, that  Godfcmbeginntng.  and  bejond  the  beginning  in  himfelf,  in  himfelf 
*sGod,co)iteined  I  am  andu,j)reper  to  htmftlf,  and  for  himfelf:  But  alfo  by  the  knowledge  of 
himfelf,  he  conteir.ed  alfo  that  N othing,  of  the  which  in  hisfecret  and  determined  pttrpofe  feparated 
from  himfelf^  he  intended  to  m.ike  all  things.  Itfolloweth  necf^urily  \  t  her -fore)  thdt  that  which 
w.is  not,  had  ni  porter  of  it  felf,mtifi- remain  after  the  Image  of  IS,  brought  or  knit  together  by 
the  fVifome  ^fGod,fubJtantially  in  himfelf,  whereby  fefis  ^hrifl  appeared  in  hii  God-kead* 

But  behold,  whenGod  the  Father  andthe  Son  throughone f^iritnal  f;ibftance  andillHmination, 
from  ont  centre,  had gatherered  together  (I(5u  Divino)  that  f>^\\\'^fep arable, 

E.K.  He  fecmeth  to  be  confumcd  to  aflics  in  a  fire,  and  fo  lyctb  as  it  were 

in  aflics  proftratc. 
E.K.  N  ow  he  is  up  again  I  know  not  how.' 
E.K.  HeTcemeth  now  JO  be  very  clear,  and  in  manner  tranfparcnt.' 

..♦,»  Say  that  lafi. 

A  I  read,  But  behold,  when  God,  &c.  as  in  the  8th.  lineabove^ 

E.K.  He  loofccth  about  him  diligently. 

t.,,tThen  did  he  feparate  that  Nothing  from  himfelf , and  oi  it  marvelonfly  lay  hid  in  him :  ft 
marzelonfly  he  wrought  upon  it:  Not  a:  c  c  iiinai  t,  for  then  it  had  been  like  unto  himfelf. 

But  iM  time,  which  he  firft  made  out  of  noihir.g  :  which  being  canfumed.  Nothing  fhall  return  in- 
Hme,  jg  jj,^  ^hcc  from  whence  it  came.  And  that  which  hath  offended  in  nothing  fhall  be  a  fecond^  oppo- 

fite  from  God,  and  out  of  God  i  which  fhall  have  continuance, world  without  end  :  And  it  (hall  bt 
alwayes  vexed,  the  Spirit  of  Godmediating:  notofthefiibJlaKeeorp'treneffeofGod,  or  of  his  Spi~ 
rit,  but  With  the  ftlf-fame  Nothing;  out  of  which  (^ od  created  ad  things.  Seeing  therefore,  that  the 
fVill  of  God, which  IS  hts  Ircagejeparating  Ntthingfrom  eternity, in  time  made  ail  things  (beinf 
the  work^of  fix  dayes.)  ^But  I  teach  you  a  Myfiery."^ 

tyfll  things  th»t  through  god  are  moved  to  the  Center  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  (which  is  the  center 
Angeli  of  the  Godhead)  are  not  after  the  world,after  the  confummation  of  the  world,  as  Angels  and  ths 

Mens  fouls,  blefled  fouls,are  not  to  be  reckoned  with  [that]  Nothing'.  But  are  of  God,  becaufe  thej  dxtell  in 
him.,  of  whom  it  isfaiJ,  There  they  fhall  not  need  the  Sun  nor  the  (Ji'feon,  the  Lamb  himfelf  fhall 
be  then  light,  and  a  Jbtning  lamp  for  ever.  Note  here  that  the  Trinity,  fir jl,  [econd,  and  third,  tO" 
tally  not  tMoved,but  bj  himfelf,  tn  himfelf,  time  bringing  forth  all  things  according  to  his  Word, 
made  all  things  except  Mav..  For  why}  when  all  things  hadpUafed  him,  not  becaufe  they  were, 
but  becaufe  by  ihefnrd(th:  I  m.^ge  of  himfelf,  and  wherein  he  is  delighted)  they  were  made,he 
made  man,  as  the  Scripture  teacheth  you,  how  by  the  Spirit  of  God  >'«  Mofes,  that  he  fhould  injoy 
and  ttfe  the  benefit  o^^all  this  fomahing  proccedtf:g  from  nothing  in  the  Creatures  of  God  in  their 
kind  :  that  in  him  God  might  be  glorified ;  net  onely  in  this  world,which  it  your  earth  &  vailtftni- 
ferj  ;  bft  t  alfo  and  chiefly  that  the  memory  of  his  exceeding  and  great  mercy  &  omnipotency  might 
remain  before  him  in  heaven,  in  the  image  »f  man,  andthe  moH-  excellent  Creatures^  world  with'- 

""'  ""^.  E.  K.  Now  he  is  fain  into  alhcs  again, as  before. 

E.K.  Now  he  flandeih  up  again,  as  before. 

Here  is  the  makingof  man  to  be  confidtred :  for  of  the  mofk  excellentejt  dignified,  and 

aii:sR]^ix:oi i^oih'iDodtfirib»(tdjajitwtrt approaching ngfr Hmo  Cod:  God  madeth$  Soul  of 

man^ 


(^  true  reUtim  ofDr,  Dee  bis  ABions^withffirits^  &  c.     57 1 


mariy   as  a  thing  k*>it  or  tied  in  the  convex  of  hts  orvn  Sphere-'^  ytht  taki»g  fart  with  Nothing  materi-  Crcaton  of 
ally,  hat  with  Nothing  Immortal.  man. 

The  Soul  was  made  fpiriciial  and  increafiiig,  wherein  the  Philofophers^,  the  wife  men  cf  this  rvorld  /fima  homini's 
are  deceived^  and  hath  been  a  fecret  fhut  up  m  the  Book  of  Eliiras,  not  fit  for  the  world.  Efdrtu  book. 

for  evenasfiejhby  conjUnEtion  and  commixtion  of  Hkjlihoods  proper  in  thetr  own  natnre  to  Note  of  the 
hring  forth  the  tmagf  of  him fetf  ;  /o  ^or/j  the  molt  exc^Ilcncell  part  of  man,  taking  part  wuh  the  [ouls  fpiiitiial 
yiKunvj  o^  God^{aridfo  perpeiHrilly  moving')  bring  forth,  after  the  manner  of  c  ternny.  every  livifig   a'^'^'^^    Mn 
foul:    the  Spirn  of  God  {conioynedwtth  the  Trinity)  \\o\-'K'\f\o^\t\\\\[\x\i-t  his  infinity.  -    ry 

gehaldin  the  beginni>7g  God  t}ath  not  nurnbrediormaWy  alt  fouls  that  ihAlcmcr  into  thefe  vef-   /\^  . 
fcls-,  or  other  part.      But  the  matter  macerialin  himlelf,  he  knoweth  and  hach  limited,  beyond  the   Sothjcltmay 
w/i'f/'jDcficiente  materia,  r/jfr«' C(j»>!of  ^f.     Therefure  /f  is conteincd  in  Number  ;  Not-,  that  it  bcfaid,thac 
is  fonteined  tn  Numbtr  to  be  nttmbred^  bnt  within  the  proportion  of  nnmbtr  centeined  in  the  l{now-       J'  qyl'c-<e- 
ledg  of  fefns  Chriji.,  taking  part  with  man.,  and  fs  to  he  »►  -ytbred.  quafi'seneran- 

Adzm fell;  tranfgrejjid  God  his  Comm.mdment-)  and  therefore  was  his fonl  darl^enei^  bare  ai:d  do^  tinmam 
nakedybecaufe  he  wantedthe  beauty  and  excellency  of  Cods  Spirity  wherein  he  dignified  him  ^  and  humanem  prO' 
made  him  likj  Unto  htmfelffhzm^z  living  foul.        He  was  caflosn,  and  now  cajleth  ofmifery,  g'?,'"'- 
wanting  the  knowledge  of  shufe  things.,  tor  tie  which  he  was  created      Now  God,  the  image  of  his 
Father^  grieved  at  (he  fall  of  man.^  and  moved  wnh  pity,  voui  hfafed-,  becaufe  of  the  excellency  of 
manytoenter  into  m^n.  being  before  feparated,  into  this  p. *rt  of  nothing,  into  man.      Not  that  he 
would  beautifie  himfelf  with  any  thing  that  m.in  had  :    But  that^  Become  man,  begotten  of  the 
Holy  (jhofl, he  might ,  as  youknow  by  the  Scriptures, make  man  acceptable  again  w'th  God  his  _.,    —  .  .v 
Father,  God  himjelf,  with  Godin  unity, for  Ju'.iice  and  Tcrrour  is  God  the  Father,  Mercy  and  love  diftmit, 
«God  the  Son.  Wifdomc  and  knowledge  is  God  the  Holy ghofi. 

He,  fince  he  became  man,  pur  not  on  ihefejh  of  man  to  become  a  lyar^  but  that  the  flejh  of  man 
might  be  full  of  the  fpirit  ef  Wuth  and  under/land  ng. 

E.  K.  Now  he  IS  fain  again  into  aflics. 
E,K.  Now  he  is  up  again. 

Anifo  receive  forgiveneffe  of  Jins-,  and  be  at  one  with  God,  which  is  to  fay,  in  his  favour,  ta' 
kj^g  hold  in  God,  not  as  created,  and  from  Creation  fnfulby  fall.  But  by  ranfome  and  redemption 
M  bought  andmade free  in  Jefus  Chrifi,  which  ojferedup  the  SacriRce  ef  frankjnctfife,  geld,  and 
vtyrrh,  0^  true  propitiationyftr  the  quicksand  the  dead. 

JVew,  my  brethren,  give  good  ear  what  I  fay  unto  you, 

Thewtfdomeof  the  Father,  in  love,  created  and  made  man,  dignifying  him ^  and  exalting  himy 
4s  the  Lord  and  (^Mafter  over  all  Creatures  mortal.  "But  how  ?  by  Plafmation.  For  it  is  written^ 
Let  us  make  man. 

Here  thou  feej}  alfo  the  Scripture  faith,  that  Cjodtookj>f  the  £arth.    Markjhts  ward,  and  con-      Eirth,' 
fider  it  when  I  (hall  apply  it. 

Now  if  this  power,  if  this  Plafmating,if  this  Taking,  which  was  the  Word,  become  man., 
perfeiiman;  then followeth  it^that  man  woi  andiSyOodcre3itiT\o:ind  crated.  If  therefore  this 
eonJHnilion  or  knitting  together  of  God  and  man,  bear  the  image  of  him,  tn  excellency  and  power ^ 
whtch  created  all  things,  and  by  whom  this  Nothing  was  fpread  abroad,  and  had  form  in  his  parts  • 
then  followeth  it,  that  the f elf- fame  God  and  Man  being  truth-,  fpeaking  of  himfelf  unto  his  Dif- 
ciples,fayingy  This  is  my  body. 

E.  K.  Now  he  is  fallen  again  in  aflies. 
£.  iT.  Now  he  is  up  again. 

«.♦♦♦  Resd^ 

A  I  read,  Now  my  brethren  give  good  ear,  &c. 

E.  K,  Nowhcholdcthuphishands. 

„,,^did  in  breakino  of  bread,  which  Jtgnifieth  the  earth,  tn  takjng  itfignified,  the  power  of  md' 
king.,  and  his  own  Office,  and  breaking  it  before  hts  Dtfciples,  atcordtng  to  the  fecret  fenfe  of  mans 
Jotil,  then  being  yet  alive,  give  lumfelf  in  the  bread,  and  tn  breaking  unto  hts  D'fctpUsj  as  the  fenfe 
of  hisw0rdfpokent 

E  K.  He  fpeaketh  ihac  I  underftand  not. 

did  import  and  truly  ftgnifie  himfelf,  his  very  body,  tofuffcr,  andfufered  in  that,  in  him,  in 

his  Godhead  anAwifdome  before  the  worlds  it  was  fo  I   bis  very  true  body  and  very  true  blood.  But 
mtwithflandin£  Myilkally.  Confider  of  this, 

E.K,  Heisgone^ 

Ct  Bleffedbe. 

E.K.   Now  he  is  here  again. 

♦♦♦♦♦  Mark^here  for  whom,  and  unto  whom  Chrift  took,,  a»d  brake  bread :  alft  took^  the  Chalice, 
And  called  it  his  blood  of  the  New  Teftament,  which  (hall  be  given. 

Here  yoKfee,ihzzin{di'\ih,a.v\dS2cr2mini3\\Y  it  was  given  unto  his  'Difci^les  there,  which  w-tt   Note, 
alfa  to  be  given  upon  tht  Crojfefor  the  redemption  of  man  kind  ',  for  elfe,  why  (hoHld  he  ha,V€  faid.   In  faith  &  Sa- 
which  ^all  be  given}  cram?nialiy. 

Qc    7.  Sut 


37  i     ($yl  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABms,mtb[prits,^c, 

But  here  mj  Brethren^  hi  that  it  tvM  to  be  given^it  was  to  feat  the  perpetnal  and  everla:flifg  me- 
mory thereof  fi»to  the  dd\md\on  of  SMan^and  the  comfort  of  his  chofen.  But  i>i  Spirit,  hf«re,he 
had  pacified  the  wrath  of  his  Father  :    Therefore  tt  was  given  and  to  be  olvcn. 

B'M  ttnto  whom  >  tohisDtfciples^andnottiKtofl-ra-/igers'y  not  unto  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees, 
but  umofrich  as  did  apprelund  him  by  tnidi. 

Here  thntfeefiy  that  to  appreh.nd  by  faith-,  is  to  be  comprehended  in  the  lo^e  ofGod, 
But  in  that  Chrifi  faid  that  fhall  bejh'd,  it  fi^nified  unto  the  worlds  end:    for  his  blood  is  always 
(lied  before  his  taihcr,  as  afattsfaUtonfor  iheobjltnacj  and  fin  of  man. 
Tl  Tcm-m-  ^''-^  ^'^"  remembrance  thereof  is  the  power  ( f  doing,  that  he  gave  to  hu  Difciples,  which  confijt- 

bra'nce.  eth  in  Au^whichmufi  be  dor.e  inthe  Qmrch  of  God^yea  even  unto  the  end.     For  as  God  (fefus 

Chrifl  )  is  f aid  to  be  a  Saviour  and  anointed.,  fo  is  he  an  eternal  King,,  and  A  Continual  Saviour  of 
fhltlit*  Potel  f"^^'  ^^  fl)  """'  ^"'''^  ccnteining  in  man  {being  dignified  through  bis  Godhead)  the  eternal  power  of 
cTeubtque.        prcfence  and  Being.,  in  all  places  whercfoavcr, 

Confider  (w/  hethren)untowhat  nfe  (hculdthe  body  of  Chrifi  bc,if  r/j^Body  it  f elf  were  not 
a  Sacrament,  and  the  holy  (ign  ot  the  peace  between  God  andean. 

Behold  it  tsfaid^  unlejfe  thou  eat  of  the  flefh  and  drinkjf  the  blood.,  thou  canfi  not.,  &c. 
If  the  T)ifctples  did  eat  the  body  of  Christy  Chrifi  minifiring  himfelf.,  and  flinding  by,  not  yet 
cr/fcified.,  why  therefore  jhouldefi  not  thou  eat  the  body  of  the  fame  Chrifij  which  dwelleth  in  thee, 
and  in  whom  thou  haft  to  dwell. 

But  here  is  to  be  corfidered  the  manner  of  eating. 

E.K.  Now  he  fallcth  in  aflics  again. 
E.K.  Now  he  is  up  again. 

.....  But  at  whom  jhall  we  learn  this  manner  of  eating?  Mybrethren.,ofhisT)ifciples.  For 
althouffh  chrifi  himfelf  alive.,  vifihly  and  fub^antially  ttood  beWe  them ,  and  minsjired  unto 
them:  Notwithfiandtngtojk^bread,  brake  it,  and  gave  it  unto  them.,  fayii^g^  fnis  is  my  body  : 
They  fimply  did  believe  it,  confidering  and  acknowUdgtKg  his  Om'nipotency  {which  Peter  had 
grounded  in  fay  !>ig.  Thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God. ) 

If  therefore  he  be  acknowledgedof  us  (^I  fpeak^  for  you')  to  be  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  Then 
muft  we  truly  confefe.fthat  all  thtngs  are  poffible  unto  him,  and  that  by  faith,  we  ought  to  believe 
the  mylftncs,  woiks  and  wonders  of  God,  Sacramentally  opened  and  to  be  ufed  for  the  cure  of  our 
own  fores. 

[He  fpcakcth  I  knownot  wh  at,  nor  to  whom,] 

A  I  read  :  But  at  whom?  &c. 

And  net  as  the  wicked  ufe  to  do  ;  Tie  the  power  and  majefty  of  God  and  his  Omni'potcncy  to 
the  tail  or  end  ot  rcal'on,  to  be  hailed  as  fhe  will. 

If  his  Apoftlcshaveleftusexnmplesofbelief,  have  taught  us  how  to  believe,  and  upon  what 
rock<ind  foundation  to  fallen  our  belief;  Then  fimply  and  nakedly  follow  the  fleps  of  true  Ftiith., 
and  laying  realon  afide,  believe. 

But  here  note,  that  this  Sacraincnt  is  to  be  miniftred  amongft  the  Apoftles,  amongft  the  Mini- 
ftcrs  and  true  Seivaats  of  God,  in  his  Church, and  not  in  the  temple  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees, 
Hypocrites,  and  Deceivers,  which  whilcll  they  tear  ChriH  Jefus  and  his  body  after  the  frowardneffe 
of  their  own  ienfc,  do  eat  (as  fudas  did)  and  fo  perifli  eternally. 

■  But  I  fay  unto  you,  and  teach  you,  that  wherefoever  in  the  true  Church  of  God  remembrance  is 
madej  and  the  ufe  of.  this  Sacrament  is  celebrated  of  the  true  body  and  blood  of  Jefus  Chrift  cruci- 
fied>  there  isalfo  the  true  body  of  Chii(f,God  and  man  lubRantial,  and  bread  of  eternal  comfort 
andfood,  to  fuch  ax  humbly,  nakedly, and  penitently  receive  it,  propitiatory  for  the  quick  and  the 
dead  ;  not  unto  kich  as  arc  dead  in  (in,  and  jn  hel],  and  out  of  this  life,  but  unto  fuch  as  are  iiere  Sin- 
nersyandfo  dead,  and  to  be  revived.  For  he  that  dwellcth  in  Chrill  is  quick,  becaufe  he  dwelleth  in 
life  and  light.  But  he  that  gocth  out  of  Chntl  through  fin,  and  in  whom  Chrift  dwelleth  not,  he  is 
dead.    Fur  this.,  I  havefaid. 

A  Lord,  whatdiall  weiay  tothePrieftx,when  they  would  have  us  to  acknowledge  Tranfub- 
flantiation,  &c.  ^ 


t^ 


^t,t,The  bread  that  was  min/fired  by  Chrifi  unto  his  'Difciples.,  was  not  a  figure  of  his  body,  hut 
Ihewordsof  his  true  body.  So  ihc  Mmxliev  ufing  i he  efpce and  perfoit  of  Chrifi- in  office,  pronouncing  the  [a] 
Confccrotion    Tvords,  d  oth  alfo  give  unto  the  people  not  Bread.,  but  the  true  body. 

pronounced.         "But  hear  me,  Thou  wufi  confider  it  as  a  Sacrament.^  and  mufi-  believe  as  the  'Difciples  didy  that 
Subfemapa-  ,j  y^  ^/,^  ^^^^  j^^^y  ofchnfi,  that  thou  eatefi  in  the  form  of  Bread. 

A  As  concerning  under  b®th  kinds  rccieving,  what  is  your  doftrine  ? 

♦,.,♦  Caro  & [anguii  faciunt  corpus  &  confiitttunt, 

A   Then  it  is  no ofience  to  God,  to  receive  under  one  kind  onely. 

(^  As  concerning  the  vvorftiipping  of  it,  being  lifted  up  by  the  Priefl-, 

ThM 


nu. 


t*tt* 


(^trne  Relation  of  Dr,  DcebisA&ms,  with  joints,  &c.  373 


That^hy  fatth,(inthat  ft  is  i>e/ieved  to  h  the  true  i>od^,)  is  alfo  hy  faith  to  ie  rvorjhppsd  : 

XJot  in  that  it  hath  the  fhape  of  bread,,  irtt  that  it  is  the  body  of  (^hrift,  true  Gad  and  mat. 

^  As  concerning  alfo  the  refervifig  oi  ic,bcing  confecrated,  what  are  vve  to  underftaiid  ? 

^....  Reafott  hath  ko  place  here  :'  To  them  that  receive  it,  it  is  a  SAcrament  •  But  receiving  cca- 
fing,tl\e  SaeramcnC(rf(«/If^<«//i.  i 

Cclebvanii,  &  accipjentibiis,  Sacramentum&Saci'ificium  eft  :  Ccflante  cckbratione  ,  &niilh's 
atclpientibiis  ,  ceflacSaci amentum  &  Sacrificium.  Nam  Sacramentutn  dicitur  ab  inrtitutioue  5c 
mode.  .  , 

The  mean  confifleth  in  them  both.  • 

To  morrow  yoit  fhall  hear  more  of  me,  iv  the  mean  feafon  confide):  Joh,  HowmercifulGod 

is  unto  JOH  through  me,  and  open  this  dodi  inc  alto  unto  your  wives ,  that  they  tnaj  alfo  know  Cjod 
trtilj. 

A  Gloria  in  cxcelfis  DeOjS^  in  terra  pax  hominibus  bons  voluntatis. 

158--.  +   "Frag^. 

fan»arik,a,:^.      Tnefday.     Mane  hora  lo  x- 

Orationibtisfin!tis,polt  hdlcrns  adlionis  le(5lioncm,apparuit,  facie  vclata>uc  pvius. 

.....i  '/  ilemunflrattdto  you,  yefterdaj,  how  the  viliblc  hi^n?  or  matter  appearing  was  united  and 
knii.ntftO\tli:tvt(ii>le,figmficated'-  wherein  and  whereunto  /<?»/jj'fr4'a!i«  my  own  form  and  perfon, 
farwhofvtmr  (alkcth  of  (fodand  Chrifi  expounding  the  Scriptures^  ought  to  tail^plainly,  truljf,  and 
openly^  that  that  which  rheyfpeakmay  be  under Jtood.  This  is  the  Office  of  a  Preacher.  Evcnfo 
.  /  ti^lk^ng  of  ^od. ,  and  illumtnated  to  this  Office,  for  the  time ,  was  bare  ,  becauff  Ifpake  not  of 
my  f elf.  But  the  dobt  rin?  I  taughty  ou  was  true :  and  is  worthy  to  be  graved  in  golden  Tablcs,and  mo- 
numcnroliy  co  be  pliiced  upon  the  a!ear,wherein  man  may  fee,  as  in  a  glafl'e,How  God  through  his  Sa- 
i[y:am£n,ts ^^id  lioly  inthtutions,  fandifieth,  regencraceth  and  purifieth  man  unto  himfelf. 

J^ow  t$  fke  worl^intended ,  which  is  called  tn  the  Holy  Art  Gebofal ,  which  is  not(^as  the  Thilo-  ^jy  SanSla 
fophers  have  written,  )    The  jirfijlepfupernatural,  but  it  is  the  ^rft  fupernatural  fiep  naturally  li-  GE  BOFaL, 
mited  «(-?«  the  48  Gates  of  Wifdoni ;    w/wf)'ff«!'/j<'//\5<7«^beginncth.     'Y\\z\i'^  is  the  fpeaking  V/ima  Porta. 
withQpdra.s'i^oiisdidy -mhifh  ttinfifjite'  s/4ll  the  reft  have  proper  limits  ■<  whereinthey  are  con-  ^'^^^f""^^'   . 
tetned.  '  fni' 

But  underfland  that  hoc  opusunum  reieiveth'  Alultiplication  and  dignification ,   by  afcenfion  (;oilo'qniim  cu, 
through  all  the  rejl  that  are  limited  according  to  their  proper  qualities,  Deo ,  fiimm"- 

of  this  knowledg  I  have  laid  a  fure  foundation  ,  have  taught  what  it  is,  andthe  inflrament  Sapiential'or' 
wherewithal,  and  whereby  it  is.  The  manner  of  proceeeding,  and  her  Bafis.    So  that  there  rvanteth  w" ,  .  ,. 
nothing  but  the  hm^h  and  eajteunknit'ting  of  thofe  things  that  are  wrapped  ^  not  with  the  l>^''^dsof     "   'P '"t»" 
itfelf,  but  with  the  obfcurity  and  caliginoiss  Cloud  of  your  own  ignorance.  Dignification. 

But  if  the  Cloud  be  in  you,  then  by  your  own  help  and  confent  it  mufi  be  removed.  What  hath 

A  By  the  favour  and  help  of  the  Highell:  we  trult  the  Cloud  fliall  be  removed.  teen  taught. 

.»•♦♦   Take  heedtherefore  you  lift  not  up  your  felves  inmind,  prefumingagatnftreafon,  (^where^      What  yet 
by  you  Are  knit  together,)  and  the  wtU  of  God :  whereby  you  are  taught  obedience.  '  e  1. 

for  prtde  is  hmefitl  before  (jod  :   and  to  be  in  love  with  your  felvesis  the  greatefi  ignorante.  Pride.- 

Sb-iH  a  dark,  feller  bmg  or  boa(l  of  her  beauty}  becaufe  fhe  receiveth  light  and  cleerneffe  ,by  a  Sclf-jove. 
(fandle  brought  into,  orjhning  into  her. 

NomorecanfithovjiE.K.jfortheripenneJfeofthy  wit  and  utiderfiancLittg  is  through  the^vt- 
fence  ot  us, and  our  illumination. 

But  if  lee  depart  ,  thou  (halt  become  a  dark,  feller   >    and  fhall  think^too  well  of  thy  felfin 
vain. 

Matter  wanteth  amengfl  you^  the  fire  cannot  continue  ,  but  when  you  bring  more  Wood,  youjhall 
have  more  fire  ,  /  wtll  not  vifit  you  again,  until  thejeventh  day. 

,    A  DeonoftroOmnipotenti,  Sempiternovero&  vivo, fit  omnis  Laus,Decor,Gloria  &gratiaium 
aftio,nunc  &  femper.     ^men. 


-j-     Praga. 

February  5..     Tuefdaj.     Mane,  horamcircitcr  10. 

•     A  Orationibus  finitis,  &  fpecialiter  pro  milericoidja  divina  fuper  nos  tres,  iA  L.JE.  K.']^'\  ad 

ejushonorem,  laudem,  &gloriam, 

E.  K.  He  is  here  now. 
A  Gloria  patri,5cc. 

m 


^ ■    ■  -  I.  ■  — .^— —   — ■      ....■■■-—  r  .       -■  --■      ■       I    ■■      -.■■—    MI-...I     ■  ■      _  jm 

574   <^  true  relation  ofT)i,  Dee  bis  AUimsy  mth  j^irits  Jkc. 

Wo  be  unto  the  lVorld,far(he  hath  appeared  before  the  Lord  Hnpitre. 
Wo  be  ftnto  the  Sonnet  of  men^  for  they  are  the  dwellingplaces  of  the  beajf. 
Fames.  ^o  ^^  "*' "  the  feed  of  the  earth ,  and  unto  the  feed  rvithin  her  j  ^orfne  is  touched  with  fire  from 

on  high  ,  and  is  trod  under  the  feet  of  the  Highejl. 

Who  ishe  that girdeth  hts  fvfordttnto  him:  or  what  is  he  that  is  ready  for  the  battel?  fuch  as 
havefarfaken  the  Lord  awd  are  run  aflray  :  ainJ.  hath  placed  himfelf  with  thefcornftil, 
fnfli  optri-        ^^^'^^  farrow  ts  at  hand  unto  all  fe^  :   the  jurt  (hall  be  trodcn  down  ,  and  the  (ueets  (hall  bear 
memuY.  witnefle  ot  them. 

Bellum.  For  there  is  a  Battail  proclaimed  in  Heaven ,  and  the  God  of  Hefts  hath  put  on  his  armour ,  uni 

is  become  afire  ofrvratb. 

Now  commeth  the  time ,  that  fuch  as  fo.  te/ear  not  God,  jhallfaU  down  Headlong ,  and  fuch  as 
have  been  lifted  up,  runne  afiray  and  down  willfully, 

Happy  is  he  that  endureth  and  appear eth  a  Labourer  before  the  Lord  ,  for  he  fhalt  enter  into  his 
holy  hill   and  (hall  be  crowned  with  the  f^iiiery. 
Such  as  GoiA  covcteth,chey  flie  from  him:  yea,fuch  as  ferve  at  his  Tables,become  his  enemies. 
What  therefore  (h.tU  I  fay  }   I  makefeed^but  I  reap  it  not :    I  build,  but  I  enjoy  not.  "■' 

A  Bem;icituhous,OGod  ,  and  help  our  frailty,  purge  our  filthineffc,  and  create  adeanhearc 
in  us,  &c- 

Thejlnner  kj">cketh  and  is  heard  :  but  he  that  is  juft  entrethyTor  into  the  SaeHuarj  of  the 

Lord,  ne  unclean  t hing  commeth  ,  for  being  cleanfed,  they  enter. 
He  that  is  a  Prophet,  or  an  yipoftle,or  a  Servant  called,  by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  andfo  fepe- 
^  rated  from  the  reft' ,  let  him  do  his  duty;  Firft',  chat  h;  make  himfelf  clean  before  the  Lord  ;    yind 

M  ake  dean   then  may  he  hear ,  and  fit  in  jif  dgment ,  again fi  the  impure  and  unjuft  ,  and  may  fee  the  works  and 
fifft"  wonders  of  the  Lord  in  his  holy  place. 

Laborovos,  adnaufcam. 

£.  K.  He  is  gone. 

A  After  an  hour  we  had  difcourfed  together,  I  fell  to  this  Prayer. 

A  O  Lord  thou  haft  heard  our  conferences ,  difcourfes  and  refolutions:  O  God,  be  our  com- 
fort, and  reconcile  thcfe  repugnances  ot  purpofes  ,  foas  it  may  appear  that  thou  art  the  merciful  Fa- 
ther, thealmighcy  and  living  God  ,  the  Creator  of  all  things  being  and  that  thy  promifes  made 
in  mercy  and  favour  ,  fhall  not  with  mans  frailty  be  overthrown,  or  Kindred.  LManifeft  thy  power 
and  glory  to  us  herein,  that  thy  Prophecies  may  come  to  light ,  to  the  end  and  pur fofe  thyWifdom 
and  power  may  work,  thy  own  honor  andglorj.     So  be  it. 

£.  iT.  Now  fir,  where  arc  you? 

♦.♦♦,.  HereIam,thefervantofGod, 

Unus  veftrum,  vocatus  eft  hujus  negotii  minijler. 

^her,  Puer. 

Igitur  ad  impleat  minifter  minifterium :  Puer  autcm  humili  &  fe  minifterio. 
Taraboh  de  Un^erfi and  that. 

fern  sudo  &  A  I  remember  the  old  Parable  told  us  of  a  man  naked,  who  cloathed  himfelf  with  leaves ,  and  of 

^s'ltpri  a  child,anda  VVhalc,&c.    ^nnoi')^.  yi prills  ii.   Cracoviz. 

Hear  my  counfel,  and  follow  it. 

Wonder f id  and  great  (ire  thefecrets  and  judgments  of  Gods  determinations  to  come :  which  are  all 
CsKfijim,  ready  leafed  and  gathered  into  your  bofome. 

A  Gmilitude  of  Thej/^regfeat  and  true :  and  are  hke  unto  the  Rainbow  which  the  Sunne  makfth  by  the  aptnejfe 
the  R  Jin  bow  of  the  matter  and  place  (that  jheweth  itfelffudd^nly  a»d  nfany  behold  it :  So  fhall  the  harveft  of  this 
very  apt,  Doftrine,  when  the  Tialis  lunnc  ,  and  the  World  rccciveth  difpofition,  fhew  himfelf  wonderful 

and  terrible  to  all  Nations. 

But  if  the.  matter  agree  not  with  the  weaknejfe  of  your  underjlanding ,  and  palpable  blindntjfe ; 
%^pinenot,  neither  murmur.    But  pray,  that  you  may  have  the  fpiiit  of  God ,  to  undeiftand ,  and 
that  your  eyes  may  be  opened. 
A  T^cium  lib.        The  Prophet  lij^ftw  ,  but  his  bey  did  not. 

c  bT    '  ^'*^  ''■'*  ^^"P^'^^  P^^7'"K '  '^"  ^"'^'^  ^y^  '""''  opened. 

Thefe  myfieries  are  delivered  and  taug  ht  to  a  Minifter  apt  for  them  through  the  Grace  andftre^ 
tte.  k.nowledg  of  God,  wherein  ho  haih  bleffed  f/jf f,Dce. 

Vnto  thee  is  :ojned  the  dignity  of  this  mans  veffel,  which  miniftreth  unto  thee,as  afervant. 
He  therefore  is  not  part  of  the  labour,   but  part  of  thy  knowledge. 
KcUey.  Kelley.  Tme  iz  is,  that  this  rain  fsHeth  out  at  thy  re^neft.    But  lo,  thou  art  let  into  the  garden, 

.    ,.,        .    andi/rf  Prfffrrf<^^f/<7r«>4//others,  asa  catherer,thatthe  wonders  of  theLordmavbe  finiftiedinhis 

orotn^-uTl  "°"'"e- 

nient  is  to  be         Therefore  feeing  thou  art  let  in  as  a  fervant,  not  as  a  f  t^  D  G,  lay  Judgment  afidt  j  and  do  thj 

I«id  afide.        duty. 

.     So 


^true  9^elation  o/Dr.  Dee  bis  ABionSy  mthj^iritSy  &c.  375 


So  fliall  it  com;  to  paffc  that  the  minifier-,  through  thee, /halt  hefatisfiedy  (as  through  the  labour  ATluough  ^ 
,  ofanecefary)  and  thou throvigh  thee  fatis fed.  Ihaltbefat'tsfedalfo.  t^'fi  d'"'^'^  ^ 

In  the  mean  fealbn  gather  thy  felf  together,  tear  God  truly  ,  and  humbly ^a  home  unto  thy  cJVfo-  ^  ^^^  g.^^^^_ 
ther.  pum  Caihoti- 

Endeavour  thy  felf  to  know  thing?  ncccfTary  for  mans  underflanding,  whereby  thou  flialt  be  aptcr  cam  Matrent 
to  judg^  and  to  take  part  wuh  the  *  Spirit  of  God.  emrtium  fide. 

I  piomife  thee,  if  thou  do  fo,  that  the  Spirit  of  uyiderfianding  in  all  hftmane  kpowledg  and  divine^  ^'"^  •'?«<»'«• 
fafficiently  for  thy  Protvirion,  Calling,  and  Creaciony^^//  multiply  upsn  thee.  ^ ,  2^'  g^^^/^ 

A  I  pi'clume  not  to  interrupt  your  dilcouifeot  matter,  butasvve  are  knit  with  the  Lord  fc/^.  L.  fi,i  cathoHca. 
in  league  of  triendlliip,  for  the  Service  ot  God,  fo  doth  charity,  and  the  order  of  our  aflaircs  re-  Apromifeto 
quire  that  fomewhat  we  fhould  underHandof  hisprcfentellatej&c]  ^*  *C-  of  great 

Cafi  fride  away  and  be  humble  :  for  he  that  hath  an  humble  fpirit  kpowethmitch.  unporcance. 

Et  cum  puer  Prophete,  es,  ab  lUo  qusre,  ipfe  te  iuformabit. 

Video  ic  circiimlpicio,  ltd  non  video,  Lasky. 

A  Oh  Lord,  what  is  this,  what  is  this!  OhLord'.  A.L.Voy^ap- 

.   Sedempofuit  Sataiuis  ill  cor  ejus,  Cr^f^/fA'/f  mandata  D«.  pm  mconjpe- 

St  qua  dixi  feceritis,  be/iefiet  vobij  :  Sin  minns,  fiat  vobisy  fed  bene  mihi.  p 

A  Give  me  leave  lo  fpeak  I  pray  you. 
.»,,♦,  Fio,  locjuendo^  macer. 

A  If  Z,4;^vt3ll,  (upon  whom  fo  much  of  our  worldly  doings  is  grounded,  as  the  Houfe-keeping, 
ftill  in  Cracovia^  in  hire  for  an  ycar,&c.)    How  fl-.all  we  fupply  the  wants  ?  &c. 
i....  Siccciderit, rtatu. 

Untcnmhabct^h..\'.~\acoelofecumreli^ttm.  ._ 

But  iniquity  and  negligence  ca-tfeth  him  avolarc  alfo,  ofzi  ,  this  is  the  lafl.  ^-  ^'  **'"«« 

A   O  Lord,  Lord,  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us.  llmum  i^^~ 

♦♦♦,♦,    Confider  this  lafi  counfel  for  lean  counfel  yott  nomore.     As  jour  fight  it,  fo  (hall  yo»  habet/eli£lum; 
fee  me.  Mahuit  zi. 

A  I  befccch  you  let  me  know  your  name,  if  it  fliall  not  offend  you  to  ask.  ultimum  coaft- 

lium, 

Sum  fanftilTimi  figiUi  foederis  centrum. 

A  Are  you  the  lame  that  is  about  the  Croffe  in  the  Center  ?  Sigillum  jcedi' 

♦♦♦♦4»   I'  C^+^^j     A  Then  arc  yoMXn'4«i«e7.         .  '"• 

Ltvj.  %elinquo,fed»o»defero.  .\         £.  iT.   He  IS  gOllC.  SiglU»'-I>(i. 

A  Gloria,  Laui,Honor  Deo  nolboOmnipotenti.     ^men. 

— ^—  «  — — »— .».^— — ^-^""""^ 

•4*    Traga, 
FebrHarit   1 8. 

xj^londay         Mane  horam  circiter  9. 
'  A  Orationibus  ad  Dcum  fulis,  &  aliquantulum  de  £.  K.  quantum  ad  myfteriorum  participatio- 
nem  prefentem :  ut  mifericorduer  nobifcum  agat,  &  illius  [£.  JC]  intentionem  ,  &  fidem  Catholi- 
cam  ielpicit,&  ut  fuadivina  bonitas  nobifcum  procederct  inmyfterio  perficiendojMt,  de  lapide  Phi- 
.  lofophoruni ,  propter  honorem  &  gloriam  lui  nominis,  &c. 

£.  K.  I  fee  an  cndiefTe  thing  like  a  red  Sea.  A  head  cut  off  from  a  body  dothappear:  Shortly  tiicti 
the  Hair  hath  bin  pulled  off it:that  Head  appcarcth  to  come  out  up  of  that  bloudy  Sea, 
tumbling  fomccimc  oncpartj  and fomctimc  another  upward,  and  fonaetimc  under 
the  water  clean. 

£.  K.  Now  I  fee  a  Tree  upon  an  old  Hill  full  of  moflfe  in  a  dcfolatc  place  j  bcfidcs 
the  former  water. 

The  Tree  is  fprung  of  a  graft ,  which  hath  been  grafted  in  .'.The  Tree  hath  a  few 
green  leaves  on ,  and  many  old  leaves:   Theftatc  of  the  Tree  is  as  if  it  were  AutHwif* 
There  lyeth  by  it  the  top  of  a  Tree  cut  off,  and  dead  withered. 
f   The  Tree  hath  a  eleven  Shots  or  branches  ifTuing  out  of  it. 

There  tumblcth  down  from  heaven  a  white  thing,  and  out  of  it  ifTueth  an  arm  with 
abroad  axe  in  his  hand,  (uch  as  they  hew  pamnci  board  with,itfcemeth  to  be  about  a 
yard  long 

That  hand  with  his  nail  maketh  a  race  down  along  the  body  of  the  Tree ,  and  then 
fpreadcth  the  bark  open  from  that  place  of  the  race  made. 

^od  erit,  &futHrum  efl-,  efl  &  non  efi.  A  VoIce« 

E.  K.  That  voice  feemeth  to  come  out  of  the  top  of  the  S  hew  Stone . 


57"^  ^  *^^^  relation  of  Dr,  Dee  his  A&ions^  with  jj^irits  fiic. 


A  Voice  otit  of 
the  white. 
I  ©branches 
cutoff  of  the 
grafted  [tee. 


h  voice  from 
theltcpof  the 
ftone. 


Regnum  "Dd 
i>  terru  inflit. 


{ 


Dee 

KeKy 


Seven  more. 


A  voice. 


If 


E.  K,  On  chc  place  of  the  Tree  where  it  was  made  bare  appeared  two  figures  of 
8,one  in  manner  underanother.  Now  the  batkis  put  together  again ,  and  the  Tree 
fecmeth  whole,  and  as  it  were  not  cut. 

Qttod  erit  &  futHrum  efi-,  jam  efi. 

E,  K.  At  this  word  he  ftrook  off  ten  of  the  Tree  branches,  and  the  ftem  or  branch 
that  ftandcth,  fcemcth  to  be  now  between  me  and  the  Sun  rifcn  about  an  hour  high ; 
And  that  ftcm  or  branch  hath  five  IcfTcr  branches  out  of  ir. 

Every. 

E.  K.  Now  there  ftandcth  one  like  Michael, ,  with  a  tanckard  in  his  h^d  of  filver 
and  (looped,  he  faith  t, 

Mich.  ,».,..  Itirum  LAvahote. 

E.  K.  He  wafheth  with  water,  and  his  hands  the  old  branch  cut  off.  Now  he  ta- 
kcth  thai  old  braach  up  in  his  hand,  and  holdeth  it  up.  The  ax  is  torned  from  the 
tree. 

♦,.,»  P/antavi  te^  &  neglexifli  mandata  &  flatuta  legis  met,.,  &  in  fitperbia  tua  defalcavi  te : 
Sedjam  memorftim  verhorum  &  pa8i  met  apnd patres,  &  occupabis  locum  folitum,  ^  ipfe  rorabo 
te  Kubtbiu  cccli.  J.tm  pon.im  ttmorem  in  cor  tuum^  &  viftabo  te  legthtu  meis-,  &  introducam  pedet 
reduHosiH  SatiBuariunt :  Neque  cades, /i cut  patres  tv.t  ceciJem^t  ;  Jndttxi  gentem  malam& 
frp£rbam,&  benedixi  et,{fed  proh  dolar)tiidet  me.  fgitur  dejeci.,&  pntcipitaviilhs  a  me:  Ne 
ferte  trinmfhtt»tes  pofui^ent  nptllum  Deum. 

Michael Magntu  es  tu  Ben  Elohim  ,  magna  eJiglortA  tua  ,  magmudo  tudfaperat  ccelos^ 

&  jam  reguabis  im  terris. 

E.  K.  Now  A//V^<«f /putteth  on  the  dead  bough  on  the  former  tree :  Now  he  with 
the  ax  with  his  thumb,  clofeth  the  barks  together. 

Now  out  of  heaven  commcth  drops  of  a  rain,  and  that  ftcm  which  was  foput  to, 
had  1 2  branches  5  and  both  that  and  the  reft  fpringeth  together  very  frcfhly. 

Michael.  ,,,„  QHihabetocCHlosvideat^&cHi[u»tauresAudtat, 

T)ee 

E,K.   Nowappcareth  one  like  A  under  the  tree. 

E.K.  or  Safeguard. 

And  alfo  I  fee  my  fclf  (faid  E.  K.)  comming  there,  and  my  Gorvn  is  aM  white,  but ^e- 
bhudied :  and  A  feemeth  to  have  a  vi'hite  Gown,  or  rather  like  a  woraans  fafcguard 
full  of  pleats  ,  and  full  of  mens  eyes. 

There  appear  fevcn  more,  fix  men  and  oncboy.     One  is  3  Blackamorc. 

They  have  all  white  garments  alfo. 

The  tree  at  the  firft  fcemcd  to  bring  forth  and  (hew  horns,  and  after  that  there  ap- 
peared men  iffuing  out  or  growing  plentifully  on  that  tree,  and  thole  men  to  have 
ihofe  horns. 

Then  he  with  the  Ax  pulled  one  of  thofe  men  off,  and  pulled  one  of  bis  horns, 
skull  and  a\\,4»elthereef  ^aveteeatte^^E.K.  and  the  other  fevenj  and  they  (iiti 
eat :  and  fo  all  the  Vifion  did  vanifti  away,  nothing  appearing  in  the  ftone. 

♦♦.«.  ^fi^  ad  rem  ;  V^os  ant  em  pofi  modicum  admonebo, 

A  After  half  an  hour,  wherein  we  talked  de  Converfione  fudaorum, 

E.  K.  Here  is  now  Levsaael,  as  before  time. 

Levan.  ,„.,  O  thott  which  art  of  the  feed  of  the  earth.,  attend  my  voice.,  and  open  thy  heart,  that 
thy  bowels  may  be  filled  withgladnejfe.,  and  that  ruthin  thy  head  may  wifdome  enter,J[nce  God  hath 
not  o-iely  called  thee,  but  alfo  hath  made  a  choice  in  thee,  If  thoM  hear  his  voice,  and  obey  it, 

'Be  not  fliff"- Kecked^  neither  fuffer  fenfual  imaginations  to  obfcnre  or  defle  thy  inward  under- 
Jlanding.  The  firfl  nouniheth  thee  to  the  nourtpment  efthyflefh,  that  thy  fle(h perijhing  may  alfo 
carry  thy  fo»/  with  it.  The  fecond  teact  eth  thee  to  under  ft  and  thy  felf  and  thereby  to  acknowledg 
the  Creator  :  that  thereby  thy  foul  purified  may  alfo  purifie  thy  body  :  that  thereby  in  the  end  thci* 
mayefl  rife  a  purified  and  perfeS  {^reature. 

Behold,  there  are  which  rife;  and  hays  \ol\ththhodizs'-  and  there  are  alfo  which  rife^  and  they 
rife  in  body. 

^ui  appetit  fe  propter  fe,  not  intclligit  Deum,  fed  qui  intelligit  Deum,  appetic  feipfum  ;  fed  appe- 
titus  ejus  non  efl  a  fe,  led  ab  alio. 

Since  therefore,  to  feeing od  inot']  for  your  own  fakjs,  is  to  glorifie  God,  lift  up  jour  felves,  and 
txhotd  the  heavens,  and  look^into  the  earthy  and  mufe  at  her  wonders:  And  let  wt  the  lejfer  part 
carry  away  thegr eater. 

E.  K.  I  pray  you  fpcak  higher,  I  can  fcarcc  hear  you. 

Thofe  that  have  their  SanUification  through  promife,  and  fulfilling  of  the  Will  of  God,  have  al- 

wayet 


Q^tnte  relation  ^/Dr.Dec  his  ABions,mihfpYits,  &g.     377 


»ayes forfakjn  thcmfdves '■  B»t yet^ioxt\\<imk\vts,  follomed  his  Commatidtments  ;  Therefore  I 
fay  for ftike  jour  felves^  and  do  the  wiH  of  God  ^  thac  for  che  comforts  of;'e«r /(f/w/ ,  and  your  e- 
ternal  falvadon  ,  you  may  leek  God. 

But  he  that  feeketh  God^feekjth  him  through  fatience^  through  afjliElionSy  through  tempt  at  id»i.  pjticnce. 
Therefore  defpife  this  LMonfierthdt  tempteth  you  ,  andtiegleU  her  m  the  miidefi  ofhcrpride^  /\ffl,a,onS. 
for  fhe  is  vooTy  miferahk,  and  prepared  as  a  fire-hand  for  defirttUion  ;  if  yon  feei^rtches  of  her,  {he  TcivptJt  ons. 
h*th  none,   if  yoti  feekjvifdom  at  her,  fhe  know  eth  it  not,  if  you  defire  qmefriefe-^andtkejoyes  of  reft,  MundM. 
ttie  cryeth  out  agaivft  joHy  fVatch^Watch,  andgirdupjourfeives. 

And  tf  joH  feek^eternal life,  or  fiudy  to  pleafe  God,  and  toglorifie  him  ,  wheremto  you  are  cre- 
ated ,  fepereite  your  felves  from  the  Harlot. 

Swear  your  fives  her  enemy  ,  and  hate  all  thofe  that  take  part  with  her  ;  For,hel}old  ,  fhe  is  he-  .A  mtindo  & 
come  an  enemy  of  him  that  created  you,  a  Blafphemer  of  him  whom  yoif  feek^to  gUrifie,the  daughter  >"tnd.ims  dc- 
cfhim,  which  fet  himfelfagainji  the  Htgheft.  J;^"'  '^*  '"- 

Therefore  for  your  Creations  fake  t  oMghtyou  to  defpifeher- 

tor  your  Redemptions  fake  to  negleit  her ,  a>idftr  the  (jlorj  that  yon  feekjo  attain  unto,  utter- 
ly  to  delpife  or  contemn  her. 

But  here,  peradventure,  you  willfiy  unto  me,  as  he  [aid  unto  C^rifi  the  Sonne  of  the  living  ^od» 

E.  K,  He  makcih  curfy  ,  and  kilTcch  the  ground. 

IVhat  fhall  I  do  to  enherit  everlcfiing  life  ? 
J  fay  unto  you  follow  the  CommandementS' 

Behold,  it  is  written,  I  give  you  a  new  Commandemnf,  Love  one  another.  j 

How  love  you  one  another  without  Charity  ? 

But  what  ii  (fharity  ?  is  it  not  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghfi  ?  jott  kjfowit  isfo,  J  oh  kpon  alfo^that 
the  Holy  Ghofi  is  called  a  Comforter. 

But  confider  with  your  felves,  why  he  ts  called  a  Comforter ;  Not  hecaufe  he  comfsrteth  him- 
felf,  for  he  is  all  comfort ;  But  i>eca<'fe  he  is  the  comfort  of  fuch  as  he  hatbjpokjn  to,  faying,!  have 
given  you  a  new  Commandement,  Love  one  another  ;  But,  who  are  they  ?  Even  they  that  cat  the 
nefti,  and  drink  the  blotd  of  the  Sonne  of  man  Jefus  Chrjft  ,  the  Sonne  of  Cod ,  true  God  and  man, 
tfhieh  unleffe  you  do  ,  you  are  not  of  that  Company  unto  whom  ^hrift  faid  I  give  yon  a  new  Com- 
-mandment. 

For  in  fo  doing  you  are  grafted  in  Chrifi,  are  [uh jell  to  the  Commandment ,  tycdunto  Charity, 
wherein  you  are  refrefhed  by  the  Holy  Ghojt  the  Continual  Comforter ,  and  giver  of  wifdom  to  fuch 
as  dwell  in  Chrift.      ,  .   _ 

See  therefore  that  none  is  of  Chrifi,  that  hath  not  Charity  ,  neither  hath  any  Charity,  that  is  not 
of  the  Company  of  fuch  as  feed  of  the  flcfh  and  bloud  o(Jeftu  Chrifi ,  without  the  rvhich  there  is 
no  Salvation,  therefore  art  thou^.  K.alyarwhenthoufaye^IfearCod,  Hove  God,  I  intend  to 
live  wellandin  obedience,  for  thoufollowefi  not  his  CommandementS-,  thoufiiefi  from  him;  There- 
fore thott  art  »ot  vtkh  him,  * 
But  I  hear*  thee  faying,  I  confedc  my  felftoChrift  before  the  Throne  of  God.  C^f.KiH 
But  thou  hafi  net  offered  thy  felf  unto  the  Priefi  ,  neither  hafi  laid  down  thy  Sacrifice.                    h°"h''^  'ht  fo 
t  fay  unto  thee  ,  Thou  confeffefi  not  thy  felf ,  neither  thy  finnes,  before  God)  bee  aufe  thou  cam-  a^thismftant, 
mefi  not  where  he  is.                                                                                                                               Penance. 

Not  that  Godfeeth  thee  not,  but  thatheisfaidnot  tohtitRnners  ,  unleffe  fAi?;' be  penitent ,  but  The  Church. 
fenance  is  limited  by  the  Church,  and  forrowfulnejfe  is  not  judged  by  thy  felf,   itbehoveth  thee   Ad  Ecclcfiam 
therefore  ,  if  thou  wtlt  fiie  unto  Chrifi ,  to  enter  into  th:  Company  of  fuch  as  profeffe  htm ,  where  (^■"^olicam 
heis,andwithwhom hcdwelleth.  •^  * 

.,  1\\tK,at  what  time  thourepentefl  thee  of  thy  finnes -,  and  (halt  confeffe  them  with  fofrowful- 
'  Mefe,  before  him  which  is  in  ojfice  at  the  my  fiery ;  there  alfo  by  the  my  fiery  {which  is  Chrifi)  ]hale 
thoK  receive  forgivenejfe  of  thy  finnes. 

Far  if  he  that  minifireth,  is  heard  in  the  power  of  his  Adminifiratien  ,  and  Sacramental  vow, 
much  more  hath  he  power  to  forgive  Sinnes  ;  For  lo,  that  he  doth,  is  not  of  himfelf,  but  his  digni- 
ty is  of  that,  whereof  he  is  called  aTriefi- 

Now  therefore  I  fay  unto  thee  E.  K.  until  thoum^kj  thy  felf  clean ,  thoufhalt  continue  filthy, 
Sc  immundis  &  impuris,  non  revelat  Deus  Sacramenta. 

But  even  as  thou,  not  clean,  feefi,  andyetfeefi  nothing'  fo  being  cleanfed,  not  feeing  thou  fhalt 
fee,  and  fee  all  things. 
I  have  done, 
A  Gloria  Patri  &  FiHo  8c  Spiritus  fanilo,  ficut  erat  in  principio,  8C  nunc  &  femper,  &  in  fecula 
feculoruua.  Amen. 

D  d  i-f*  'Prage 


5 7  8     (oyf  true  Relation  ofDt,  Dee  his  AStofisltjpith  ffirits^^c. 


ijSy.  +  Tragi. 

Fehuarii  23.  \}f '^ 

SaturdAy  A  mcridie  horam  circitcr  2.  ^  ^-    . 

Orattonibus  ad  Deum  tuds,  pro  luce  &  vericace  divina,  &c. 

A  The  occalion  of  this  comming  to  the  Shcw-Stone  ,  was  that  as  we  lat  together  in  the  Stove" 
there  was  a  pat  or  (troke  or  two  (not  natural)  given  on  the  Bench  and  Wall:  and  withal  1  felt  on 
my  head  a  heavy  moving  thing.,  and  alio  after  that  E.  K.  felt  en  his  back  ,  as  if  one  had  written  let- 
ters dilUn^5Hy  :  whereupon  we  went  to  underltand  the  will  of  God'j  as  being  thereto  half  warned 
and  Hirrcd  by  thcfe  tokens. 

£..  K.  Midimi  is  here. 

A  Bene Jifti  lunt  pedes  evanoelizantium  pacem  &  favorcm  akiffimi, 

Madimi  .,,.,.  f^h^  fljould  I  fpeak^unto  joHf  Jinee  you  have  m  faith} 
Faith.  f-yhyjhonld  I  teach  yon  that  defpife  my  documents  ? 

/  \nockjn  vain,  for  you  hear  me  not. 

IJnus  unam  alms  alium  qnnrtt :  difpares  eftis. 

A  Deuspotell  omnibus  &diverfilTimisfatisfacere,bona  Temper  petentibus. 

Madimi  ,,t,,»  Shall  I fpeakj^or  no} 

A  Speak  in  the  Name  of  God,  who  would  not  hear  the  words  of  the  wife  and  of  the  roiohty 
of  ihe  good  and  true?  ^     ' 

MtitcY.  Madimi  „„»  Shall  1  clofe  my  mouthihecaufe  ofyenr  vpickedneffe  ?  or  fljall  I  open  my  mottth,  be^ 

Madimi,  coftfe  my  Mochc r  hath  commanded  me  ? 

I  will  go  back^,  and  will  de  fire  that  my  mouth  may  be  fewed  up  with  a  double  threed  :  for  affure 
yourfelf  I  will  not  come  again  tpillinglj  :  But  iffhefay  again.  Go ,  I  vtillcome, 
,  ' lui ,  wherefore  doth  Godgive  bread  to  Dogs :    or  fuffereth  his  fonne  tofnine  to  the  bottcmleffe 
Caves}    I  know  a  eaufe^buc  yet\  am  torn  infpirit, 

O  Afother,  Mother  ,if  thou  jhouldejl-  fpeak^unto  this  people  ,  out  of  and  from  above  the  Cl^udty 
they  would  melt  before  thee  ,  yea,  they  would  fall. 

But  lo  thou  fpeakfjl  unto  them  by  thy  daughter  that  they  may  fianda»d  hear )  but  they  hear  not : 
But  I  fwear  unto  thee,  they  defpife  thee. 

ffhat  {hall  therefore  become  of  them  ?    I  go  ,  I  will  fee  if  I  can  abfent  myfelffrom  thfnt. 

A  She  went  away  as  if  fhc  had  been  angry,  in  the  mean  fpacewc  argued  after  our  former  man- 

r ;  £.  K.  as  he  was  wont ,  and  I  ftjll  in  my  conlf ant  hope  of  Gods  mercies, 

E.  K.  Now  (he  is  here  again. 

f.iT.Shcputtcthoffherpcticoat ,  and  putceth  on  an  other  Garnncnt  full  of  pleats 
of  a  golden  colour,  and  after  that  an  other  Garment ,  upon  that  Garment  with  ma- 
ny Crowns  bordered  on  it,  with  hands  out  of  every  of  them,  and  a  great  part  of 
the  Arm,  they  arc  right  hands,  the  firft  Garment  (which  (he  put  off)  and  flingcth 
it  into  a  fire. 

Madimi  ,,,,,  \  fpeak^unto  you^  though  \  fay  nothing. 
Madimi  ^„,,^ThecoHnfels  from  above ,  are  perfetl,  bAaufe  they  defcend. 
C»»fiHa  "Del.  ^'^f  '^^e  wrappings  of  mans  wity  are  unpsrfeB  knots.,  hard  to  put  together,  and  harder  «  unlofe  ; 

1  heref ore  they  are  not. 

Imprifonment'       But  thefe  areofGod,  and  they  are  true-  Envious  minds,  and  falfe  hearts, -do  hunt  afterthee,  and 

conrpircd  a-      they  have  faid  and  have  cowTf/rf^j    Butlhavefaidunttthem,  be  it  unto  them  ,  as  they  have  mea- 

gainft  n  c.         fured  unto  others :  /ind  that  which  they  have  nonrtfhed  in  corners,  let  it  be  fire  ,  and  confnme  their 

A  dwelling  places;  Let  it  feek^out  their  brothers  :   Let  their  throatts  be  hurfi  it  pieces :  Let  it  range 

along  their  Kingdomes  ,  and  let  it  burn  downthe  gate  of  their  borders,  that  the  way  may  be  wide  : 

for  a  narrow  way  ferveth  not  where  1  bring  i»  mifchief ,  I  will  bring  her  to  the  borders ,  and  will 

place  her  in  the  Gates,  and  will  fay  unto  her. 

Accipe  tibi  vim. 
sy^nd  I  will  give  her  a  two  edged  fword,  but  I  will  not  enter  in  with  her  :  becaufe  I  willtiot  hetr 
their  Lamentations,  neither  be  moved  with  their groanings. 

Thefe  are  the  hard  and  heavy  knots,  that  the  evil  fpirit and  mans  wit  hath  wrought  togther  ;  But 
becaufe  they  are  humane,  they  fhall  petifh. 
7  lie  way  ij  Truly  it  feemeth  good  to  my  Mother  and  me  :  and  our  confent  thinketh  good  alfo  ,  {and  the  rather 

picparedby       becaufe  (he  hath  prepared  the  way  by  her  own  wifdome,  which  part  of  the  North  yon  muji  atwajti 
^' ^'         _j[/ooi^unto,)  and  be  directed  ^^. 

'''  For  why,  that  ^onfiellation  is  true ,  and  dothttach  thofe  that  errt ;  Thofe  alfo  that  *re  right^t 
(omfoneth  thtm. 

But 


ner, . ,  

After  half  an       E.  K.  Now  (he  is  here  again. 

hour. 


^true  relation  of  Dr. DcQ  his  ABions.mthfpritSy  &c.     379 


Bttt  I  vull  go  Hnto  my  0\^Eother  ,  aadask^  her  once -^orf,   whether  1  maj  hi  Ac  thefe  rhingsfrem  SapitmUdlvi- 
joti.  Ttd  HoflratUbec 

£.ii:.  Shcisgone.  f'Jl'JiV"' 

A  We  read  over  che  premiffes,  and  gathered/.hac  ibme  treachery  was  devifed  againft  me :   AM  Hmlgnt.  "'"' 
therefore,!  befeech  God,:o  give  ui  his  couiilels ,  and  advjfes.co  be  my  guide  and  procc^aor,  my  light 
and  comfort. 

E.K.  Here  (he  is  again.  h 

Madimi ,.«,».  7  hiit  jov.  both,or{>fyou  will  be  diftra[i:ed)one  of  yoa,gofecretly  hence,and  fpeedily      piIc  from 
unto  Laskv  :    So  (hull  tt  corns  to  f^jje,  thM  he  whom  zhey  mzaidcd  to  i»xprifan ,  (fayi^ftr,  we  will  Pra^e. 
compelhiui  to  perform  his  word,  Icali  be  peiadveiiture  triumph  eli'ewhcrc  againH  us; }  [6c]raayat       The  words 
la/l,open  the  Trifofj  'Dosres  for  them ,  afid  laltitc  a  ftrange  King,  even  in  the  felf  lame  pLice,  where  of  t^'C  Confpi- 
they  lliall  eat  to  moi  rows  Dinner.    But  when  they  perceive  that  yoii  are  gone  ;    Then  will  they  h»-  '"°"' 
derjtaadthitt  yon  t^yieivj  and  that  zn<:  h'uK  vi\jod  was  ai»io»gfi- you, 

J  come  again.  .  . 

E.  K.  She  IS  here  againc.  „Jf''^^'  °" 

Madiini  Jftt.efe  words  he  trne^^bear  witMefe  of  the  truth :  if  yon  thinl^them  to  befalje^yoi* 

need  not  fallow  thsm. 

A  How  iboa  would  you  advile  me  to  be  going  hence  ?  you  fee  how  bare  I  am  of  money, 
Madimi  „„..   Dofoastnanemtnentdanger.   Ihavefpokechelafiword.     Sedadhuc  tria; 
Omnia  fucctdsnt  voto. 

A  DeonolhoOminpitcnt!,(apienti,&  mifcricordi,  fit  omnis  giaciarum  aflio,  Laus,  Honor,' 
&  Gloria,  nunc  &kmpcr ,  (nyimen. 


^Monday 

Februarii  2j.  ameridie,  circiter  i  i.  £.   K.    Fell  on  his  back  as  One  had 

PrecibusadDeumfinitis,cit6apparuK  Angclus    written  as  he  fat  at  the  Tabic-,    Hcre- 

^^^-  .  upoawcrcfortcdtothcShcvv-SionCj&c. 

E.K.   Wtxcis  Madimt. 

Mnimi  ,,,,^,  You  have  vowed  to  ynur  felves ,  and  to  the  Lord ,  perform  your  vowes.  That 
which  God  commandeth.,  that  do. 

Ex cftfe  your  felves  with  men  ,  andgirdttf  yonrG-irments  to  the  travails ',  Notinfvaggotjybut 
on  Horfe-bac!^. 

E.  K.  I  pray  you  to  give  us  (omc  inftru(5lions  of  my  Lord  Lasky  his  being, 

Travaile  hence  dtreElly^  <i«ci  «/;f(?  Wratiflania  ,  and  there  1  will  meet  you. 

E.  K.  I  pray  you  to  deal  openly  with  us,  according'to  our  frail  ftatc,  and  to  declare 
unto  us  of  my  Lord  Lasky  his  cftaic.  a,  l 

Madimi  .,,,♦,  Youdz^ndnozu^an  Laik.y  ■>^^tLasky  dependethupenyoM  ;  tfhedocvily  hit 
fHnifkment  is  ready :   tfhe  do  well,  he  d^th  it  for  himfelf. 

I  am  greater  then  yoM^andmy  eye  firetcheth  farther  then  yours ;  yea^  though  you  went  to  mor- 
row, you  have  loli  fome  dayes.  , ;   ; ;  •  .;  Daye?; 

A   I  muft  carry  my  Books  with  me,  we  mufl  be  at  the  leaft  three  horf'e. 

Madimi  ,   iVbf/o,  ^«f  thou  fhalt  hide  them.  hidden' 

A  Am  I  to  return  hither  again,  before  my  wife  come  from  hence? 

Madimi  lamnotflefh,  neither  do  I  move  ,  or  am  moved  with  fiefhi  But  if  you  fulfill  che 

firlij  the  reli  folioweth. 

Do  this,  as  though  yon  committed  theft,  A  Secretly  and  fpeedily. 

for  if  the  hours  be  diminijhed,  the  purpofe  fhall  alfo  want  fucceffe.  Hautes 

DuUtis  es,  fecjnere  ji  vis. 

The  hand  ts  open,  and  ready  to  take  hold  on  you ,  what  therefore  fhaU  I  fay  more  to  youf 

A  What  hand  I  pray  you  ? 

Midimi  ,,,,.,    OHaniis  ampleSlensnanrapieits. 

A  Lord  I  underfiand  not  that  neither. 
£.  K.  i  he  is  gone. 

^  In  manuSjtuas  Domine,  Commendamus  noftra  corpora,  anjmas  noftras  &  fpiricus  noftros. 

tAmen. 


Wedxefday. 

February    27.  A  I  and  Jf.  K.  and  Thomat  Kelly  as  fcrvant,  rode  to  Limbarg,  (otherwife  na« 
med  Nhnlfitrge,)  fu  miles  from  Prage,  in  the  way  toward  Bre^el :  otherwifc,n3med  PFraiiJlama. 

D  d  2  FebfH-^ 


Books  to  be 


380     (^jftrue  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^witbfprits^^c. 


A  Voice. 

Note  the  rei- 
lonw'iy  a  Re- 
ceptacle is  f 
more  credit. 

Hidlm. 


Febru^rit    aS.  Mane  circa  6  horam.        ^At  Lintberg. 

ThnrfdAy.  Note,  I  had  caufed  from  4  of  the  clock  in  the  morning  the  Horfes  to  be  looked  unto, 
fo  as,  by  rive,  or  afl'oon  as  it  was  break  of  day,  we  mi<jht  be  riding. 

In  the  mean  fpace  while  £.  K.  yet  lay  in  his  bed  awake  ,  and  I  was  in  the  next  Chamber  by,  in 
orderii  o  my  things  of  my  male.   E  K.  heard  a  voice  (like  mine)  fay  D. 

Whereat  ke  asked  me  ,  what  iaj  you  ?  I  anlwered,  that  I  fpake  nothing.  Then  he  doubted  what 
creature  did  ufe  that  voice.  Afterward  he  role :  and  when  he  had  been  ready  a  while,  and  fate  in 
the  Chamber  where  my  male  lay  ,  he  laid,  that  he  felt  famewhat  crawling  ,  or  as  »*ie  vnriting  on  hit 
^fck^f  2nd  zt  length  10  afcendiyito  his  hfitd-  And  lo  I  left  him,  and  went  out  into  another  place,  and 
kneeled  to  pray,  and  prayed  ,  and  upon  the  comming  in  ot  ThotttM  Kelly  into  that  room  where  I 
kncekd  (in  the  Door  of  a  little  open  Gallery  over  the  (Ireet)  I  rofe  up  ,  and  went  in  again  to  £.  K. 
and  he  told  me  that  he  flumbred  by  reafon  of  the  heavinefle  of  his  head,  and  that  he  feemed  te  fee 
me  praying,  a»dM\chac\  to  /{-and  by  me,  I  anfwcrcd,  that  truth  it  was  I  had  been  fomewhaC  bent  to 
AVifion.  prayer,  but  that  I  cc^uid  no:  pray  as  I  would,  &c.  Hereupon,  Immediately  he  faw  Michael  over  my 

Head  with  a  pen  in  hu  hand  :Thereupon  I  was  relolved  that  I  was  to  write  fomewhat  of  importance: 
And  I  made  fpecd  to  take  pen,  ink  and  paper,  and  to  fettle  my  felf  to  writing  ,  becaufe  we  made  ha(t 
to  rid ' ,  as  intending  to  ride  8  or  9  miles  that  diy  ,  and  company  tarrying  for  us :  one  of  them  be- 
ing a  Jew,  whofe  filler  is  wife  to  Doitor  Salomon  oi  Prague  ^^  ^^^t  &c.  And  going  about  to 
attend  for  I'omething  to  write,  a  voice  faid,as  followeth. 

Cur  fton  includis  te  ad  audtcdum  vocem  meam  ? 

A  Hereupon,  I  did  iTiut  all  the  Doors,  and  uttermoft  Doors, 
^  Z'MiTf ,.,..,   In  rcccptaculo,  nt  magisapprobctur  vcritas. 

A  Hereupon  fpeedily  I  took  out  the  She  w-Hone,  a!nd  fct  it  on  the  Table  before  E.  K. 

£.  K.  Here  appearcth  a  white  Circle  roundabout  the  border  of  the  Stone,  and  a 
ball  or  Globe  of  flaming  fire  in  themidft  j  The  white  Circle  hath  greac  brightncfle  of 
lightinit. 

E.  K.  Now  here  is  Mddiml ,  flic  ftandeth  in  the  white  Circle :  and  lookcth  into  the 
firejfhckncclcih. 

On  the  cutlidcof  her,  ftandeth  Michael  with  a  fword. 

J5.  K.  Madimi  is  gone  away ,  and  Michael  is  come  to  the  lower  part  of  the  Circle. 

A  voice  „»..♦  Speaks,  for -who  controllethmef 

E.  IC.  Michaei  bowcth  himfelt  toward  his  feet,  as  though  he  kiffcd  the  place 
where  he  Hood :  as  if  it  were  the  Circle  that  he  kifTcd. 

Michael  .,,.„  Tkefe  are  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and  of  me  his  z/ingel^  and  LMinifler  of  truth: 

and  they  follow. 

Behold^  I  have  led jott  forth  diver fe  times  :  andyoKhave  obeyeime.  Therefore  J faj  ttnto  jopt^ 
Be  *'0T»  Scewardi  of  more. 

A    O  meicifuIGod. 

E.K.  He  fprcadcth  his  Arms  abroad,  and  ftoopeth  down. 

Michael  .,„j.  He  that  committeth  his  Treafure  unto  man,  findeth  favour^and  at  his  return  bath 
his  own.  Btnhethat  committeth  himfelf  unto  me,  andheareth  my  voice ■)  I  will  write  his  Name  in 
the  Book^of  Life.      Behold,  Behold,  Behold,  T  fwear  and  it  is. 
'Dte.  That  tn  the.  Dee,  /  delight.     And  lo,  becaufe  thou  hafi  obeyed  me ,  and  not  of  force  of  humaKs 

perfrvafions ,  f  (hew  Hnto  thee  what  is  to  come  ,  <j«^  W?4f  I  would  have  thee  to  do :  rt«<i  wherefore 
thou  commed  hither. 

A  Fiat  voluntas  Dei.  E.K. 

Michael  »  Cover  me  for  a  while)  lefi  peradventure  thou  fee  lambejond  the  al>ility  of  thj 

capacity,  and  fa  return  not  eafily . 

E.K,  He  bccomnicth  very  bright. 

A  I  underllood  no:  well  this  laying,  neither  £.i<r. 

Michael  I  fay  unto  thee  cover  the  receptacle, 

A  We  covered  the  Hone  a  while,  and  read  the  premifTes. 

E.  K.  He  is  brighter  then  he  was,  the  Circle  of  light  ihineth  ftill. 

^  Weuncovcred  the  Stone,  and  then  he  fpake  again. 

Michael    »...,.    Before  twelve  moiicths  of  your  account  be  finifhed  ,  with  the  Sunne-  I  wit 
keep  my  fromife  with  thee ,  as  concerning  the  deflruftion  of  Rodulph  :  lefi  peradventure  ■,  he  tri- 
„^^  umph,  as  he  often  doth,    for,  f/j^ //»«  are  many  times  pcrufcd  by  him ;    Saying,  T\[\%m3X\AoKAy 

The  deflrH&l-  where  is  become  his  God,  or  his  good  Angels  ? 

vaoiKodulpb.       And  behold,  I  wtU  fweep  him  off  the  face  of  the  earth '.  And  he  fhaR  ferifh  mijeraily:  that  he 
may  underftand  ,  that  thou  dealt  not  for  thy  f;lf ,  Ijwt  ^}^^  fulfihhc  vs'Qik  of  thy  mafter. 

UHor** 


(^jltrue  9{elation  of  Dr.  DecbisAclms,  with^iuis,  &C.    3cii 


cJ)f(w**(9^-f/-/ w/i/^r/»j»>,  even  in  the  fecondmoneth,  (the  twelve  erdcd)5f(?t'<fn.  'st\ 

eA»dfor  a  truth,(4s  J  am)  will  place  htm  in  the  feat  Imperial;    Hajhail  pofejfe  an  Sm^ire  A 

mefigreat:  and.  {hall  (heiv^ifhat  it  is  to  govern^  when  Cod  placeth.  All  cor.ditio- 

Iii  his  time  will  I  fullhl  many  things  that  I  have  promUcd  thee  ,  and  I  will  be  mercifull  unto  thce  ;  TnlUZu 
bcciule  thoii  hart  not  broken  my  Covenant. ,  '"^  ' 

My  minde  abliorreth  from  Lusk^y ,  for  he  is  neither  faithful  Co  me  ,  nor  to  thee :  neither  he  ca-        A.  L. 
r-cth  tor  his  own  1011), 

A  Chamo  &  trxi;o  maxillas  illius  conftringe  (o  Dsus)  ut  apprcximet  ad  ce. 
Michael  „.,.,    The  fpeedy  remmef  Curtius  was  to  deliberate  ve it h  Rcdolpb  horvthej  might, 
(((»der  the  colimr  ofJi*fitcc)  emangU  thee. 

And.  lo^  vhcm  thoitfafiredjt  and  fed fi  at  thy  Table,  is  he,  that  hath  wet  his  hand  in  the  dijh  rvitb 
thee,  and  hath dzl.viicd  thee. 

Moreover,  he  hath  betrayed  his  Majlir  :  And  the  caufe  of  his  adverfity  ,  hath  had  chief  rott  in  ^>"^rtcns. 
him.  F^m  the  third  year  he  hath  done  unjufll^  :  and  h.ith  made  naked  his  Lords  fecrets.  Soniagmr, 

But  he  \hall  have  his  reward  :    and  Oiall  periOi  with  his  own  hand.    Before  thott  CAih.:fi  cut  of 
r/j/oww  D«»r«,  f*  frt^f//7^y«/>r«<fr,  Rodolph  knew  of  thy  going. 
And  tor  a  truth,  his  ktteis  are  before  thee. 

Therefore,  tt  bchoveih  m: ,  to  give  thce  warning,  and  to  te^ch  and  inftruiS  thee,  as  one  exeicifed 
ill  my  bulinelle. 

Cover  me,  I  am  become  cleerer. 
j\  We  covered  the  Receptacle. 
After  a  while  we  uncovered  it. 
Michael  t,,..,This  therefore  fhalt  than  do. 

The  fame  way  thou  camefi  ,  the  fame  way  then  jhith  alfo  return  :  Not  to  flie  from  their  malice 
or  tyranny  :  But  tu  Hand  in  the  face  of  them  as  my  fei-vant. 
,      Hereby,  indire^ly,jh.ill  the  Tcanoni  underjtand  you  k»ort>  him.  The  Traitor. 

^nd  RodolphuS  /j^Jrdl  heart,  I  wtlljtir  ftp  wuh  indignation  agatnjl  him.    For  hefhallbe  conflru- 
ed  a  Ljar. 

And  they  fhall  begin  to  fear  thee,  and  alio  to  love  thee  :  and  thou  (hale  be  in  favour  amonoft 

»^^°"-  •  ^  "^  Note. 

-.4«»»<<f(;  their  doings ,  and  hear  tieir  fayings.     t/indthofe  things  they  fhall  offer  thee ,  refufe  Annuatc  their 
not.     I  tvill  fend  one  oHt  to  pay  them  their  wages.  doings. 

Moreover,  I commaed  thee  KeWy  ,  (^But  in  my  own  perfon ,  1  counfel  and  adverttfe  thee)  that 
thgu  take  part  wuh  the  Lord  J  efas :     And  go  forward  with  the  bufincfle  thou  haft  in  hand .  ^  Beljkc  he 

For  why?  They  fliall  be  fliortly  made  open  and  plain;  left  thy  ^£^)  word  (to  the  Emperour  he  was  fiudying 
meaneth)  receive  foil  in  the  hearts  of  men.  '^  D/infions 

But  I  bind  It  not  to  that  place.     For,  the  fruit  that  fpringeth  of  it ,  fhall  do  my  fervice  with  Ste-    °^^  ^  Table* 
ven;  ay/Wyet,  if  he  wiU,  with  that  nni\i[\  Lask^y.     And  it  fhall  be  a  (jarden  for  yon:  wherein  maderne  ^ 
yoft  (hall  not  borrow  of  the  ^Vorld,  but  of  the  GiiiofGod.  privy. 

And  hitherto  I  will  deal  with  thee,  that  the  leafi  thing  which  thou  hafi  bfiowed  in  obedience  to-  Yet  if. 
ward  me  ,  {hall  not  be  forgotten.  Vionum  Dei. 

Live  jou  together,  as  brethren  :  and  wonder  together ,  at  my  works ,  and  in  me,  for  there  fhall     °6^'"^r> 
Ktt  a  hair  of  yuitr  head  perijh  ;  So  that  J^»«  li'ten,  and  be  obedient  unto  my  voice.  If. 

fVhen  therefore  tho»  commejt  home ,  hide  not  thy  felf ;  But  fee,  that  the  Infant  be  regenerated.        mfans  ba^tl' 

A  As  concernin-j  the  Godfathers :  fliall  1  requelt  and  ufe  fuch  as  I  intended?  ■^andus. 

Michael  .,.,..   'T>o,  that  thou  haft  done.  ^^"^' 

'  Butput  all  I  hefe  t  hings  up  amongflthe  fecrets  of  your  hearts ,  as  though  not  feeing ,  jret  feeing 
all  things. 

Let  the fe  for  this  time  frfjice. 

£.  ^.  The  fire  is  gone,  he  and  all. 

A  Creatorinoftro  Omnipotent],  Proteilori  noftro  mifericordillimo  &  confolatori  noftroabun- 
dantiilimo  in  tempore  nece(ll:atis  noUrs  (^i  perennis  Laus ,  Honor ,  Gloria ,  &  giatiarum  zAiOi 

n/imen, 

A  Hereupon  wc  had  great  comfor,  and  lb  braie  our  fafl,  and  returned  to  Prague  ngain,  before  4 
of  the  clok  in  the  afternoon. 


'  Note. 

While  I  was  thus  out,  and  had  left  a  letter  for  the  Curtefe  Balthafar  Federictfs.'Dominus  ab  OJfa^ 
<tc.  to  deal  with  the  Spanifh  EmbafTndor,  the  Lord  %omfe,  and  myne  Her  Kinskjy,io  crave  pardon 
of  my  fudden  departure,  and t he  (fhild not ytt  chnftened  ,  &c,  and  had  given  my  wife  charge 
not  to  deliver  the  Letter  before  Friday  night,  &c.  It  came  to  paffe,  that  this  Mr.  Balthafar  had  fenc 
yw>rd  of  his  camming  to  7rag4  with  the  Lord  Kinsk^y,  (whom  on  the  Friday  before  I  had  met  ri- 
ding 


^8  2.   (^A  tnte  relation  ofDu  Dee  his  ABionSy  mth  fpiritf,8^c. 


ding  out  of  Town:  and  he  told  me  that  he  was  to  be  out  three  or  4  daycs,  &c.)  and  that  he  was  de- 
firous  CO  Ipeak  with  me. 

Upon  which  oecafion  my  wife  thought  it  bcft  to  fend  tlie  letter  to  him,  and  fo  did,  not  long  be- 
bre  my  coming  home.  Which  thing  when  I  underftood,  I  was  half  forty  for  it,  andfent  prefcntly 
word  to  Matter  Balth^far  of  my  coming  home,  and  to ccrtifie  him  that  my  wife  had  erred  to 
fend  that  letter  unto  his  worfhip  before  fr/iii^tjr  night,  when  flie  might  perceive  that  indeed  I  did 
nde  forth  to  Brejjel, 

He  thereupon  was  defirous  to  fpeak  with  me,  and  of  him  I  received,  my  Letter  which  he  had  per' 
Mfed^und  offered  himfelf  moft  ready  to  latisfic  the  content  thereof,  &c. 

Now  to  the  chief  purpole,  At  my  return  home  from  Mailer  B^lthafar  Federick^  ab  Ojf*->  I  found 
Smericiu  SontagitUi  in  my  wives  Hove  with  Mi'^er  Kellf^  -who  at  the  fight  of  me  was  fore  amaMd^ 
and  half  mt  abU^or  not  viHiHg  tofpeak^i  but  fud,  vos  cltis  veteres  .cquitcs.  Then  Mr.  Kellj  told 
me,  that  fwmrw  had  told  him,  that  the  Emperour  had  been  all  day  yetterday  very  melancholick, 
and  would  Ipeak  with  nobody.  And  that  he  k>'ev>  of  my  journey  in  a  moment  vhen  itwM,  and 
that  by  cl.''  Jews,  &  fpecially  by  the  Dodor  his  Ion,  that  ha^  gone  about  to  get  me  the  four  hoifes,ac 
laboured  very  much  with  himfelf  (unasked;  t)  peifwade  me  that  the  Emperour  his  firft  and  chief  urx- 
derllanding  of" it  was  by  the  Jews,  &:c.  Hereupon  (being  now  night)  he  went  h^me. 


-^  Prag<e. 

(Jl  far  til  14. 

Thurfday.  A  mcridic,  hora  2  \,  Baptiyatus  erat  Michae! DtedMus  meus  in  arcis  Pragenfis 

majoriTemplo.  Baptifmum  cjiercente,  CrfaieaeMajertacisCapellano. 

Sulceptonbus  veib,  Illulfr)llimis  Dominis,  Domino  don  Gulielmode  fanfto  Clemente,  Hifpani- 
arum  Regis,  apud  Csefarem  Legato,  &  Dommo  Magnifico,  Domino  Romff^  fummo  Caefarex  maje- 
ftatis  cubiculario,  &  a  confiliis  arcanis  intimo  &  primario,  &c. 

Sufcepiricear.tcm,  Nobiliflimafcemina,  DominadcDittrechllain,  Domini  de  Dictrech(lain,ux- 
ore  chanlbma,  qui  majoi-  Domo  Cxlarcae  ma jcHatis  eff.  Infanti  vcro  nomen  erat  inditum  Michael 
Hkhacl,  adpeticionemmeam,  o^^r*r<j«»^;4r»  Michaelis  wfworww,  qni  {ex  mifericorditiDei)  tarn  f Hit 

ejt  &  erit  nobis  b.'».ficM,  anxiliaris  &  tuteUrUy  &c. 


4-    y/-*)!^^. 
M'trlii  18. 

(Jlfonday.  Ivlane,horam  circiter  7. 

A   P'ccibv.s  (ex  more)adDeum  fufis,  p:imiim,deiiide  (aliqua  intcfpo{itamora)aliisetiamejacu- 
lacionibulque  fadis  pro  niifenccrdia,  luce  &  .-^uxilio  Dei,  ice.  po(t  horas  2.  tandem  nulla  fatSia  appa- 
ririone,  c.'iiavimus.  E^o  veio  de  Deiiiatimidus,caufamfubeHe  magnamdobicavi, &c, 
A  Mikrcre  noHriDeus,&  nenobifcumagaSjjaxcaomiies  iniquitatcs  noftras,  t/^men. 

Afar  tit   20, 

fVednefd.ty^  mar.c.  A  Note —  E.K.  ycfierday  had  a  fhcw  of  a  little  thing  asbig  as  a  peafe  of 
fire  as  it  were  i'l  che  (lone  going  about  by  the  brinks.  And  becaufc  it  wasnot  in  fhape  humane,  he 
of  purpofe  would  not  declare  it  fa  CO  me,  and  fo  I  have  noted  (asapp^areth)  of  no  mew.  This  he 
told  me  on  Tuefday  night  (^that  was  yelTernigh:)  upon  oecafion  of  a  oreat  Ifir  and  moving  in  his 
brains,  very  lenfiule  and  diliind,  as  of  a  creature  of  humane  fhape  and  lineaments  going  up  and 
down  to  and  fro  in  his  brains,  and  within  his  skull :  fometimes  feeinino  to  fit  down,  fometimeto  put 
his  head  out  at  his  ear. 

And  this  began  from  the  fame  night  following. 


+  Prag*. 
Aiartii   20.  '  "  , 

JVednefday,  mane  circiter  <5  7. 

A  Prccibus  ad  Deuiii  fulis  aliquantoprolixioribusquamexmore,&c. 
(iatim  fafta  eft  apparitio. 

£.  K.  Here  is  the  fame  (hew  c^f  a  little  parcel  of  fire  fomcwhai  lefTc  then  apcafc, 
going  about/ he  border  o^  thcftone. 

E.  K.  Here  i^eat,  but  he  hath  a  covered  fdct^  I  k»$w  him  not,  his  covering  is  of  a 
compoundcolcuV,  between  black,  red  and  white,  he  is  covered  down  to  his  middltf, 
the  ground  of  it  is  white :  There  be  fpois  oi  black  and  red  on  it,  fome  big^fomc  little, 
as  if  they  had  been  fprinUcd  on  with  a  pen,  01  daihedonwith  a  pencil. 

S 


(^trm  9^elation  of  Dr»  Dee  his  AUionSy  mth^irm,  &c.   383 


». ,. » ^gainfl  divine  necejfity  is  no  prajer  nor  refinance-  ■ ;     - 

E.K,  1  fed  nothing,  in  my  head  now,  and  cill  now  I  did,  as  is  moved  before. 

i«„t  Comedo  you  Prophets,  and  render  your  accounts.     Come,0  you  that  have  frcked  of  the 

brejis-^  wherein  the  -judgments  And  fecret  xvill  of  the  Ljrd  is  hid,  and  of  Necejfity  to  come,  father 

yourfelves  together,  render  feme  account  why  the  Kin^  of  eternity  defc  ending  from  the  heavens  hath 

fo  often  vifited  you}  And  why  he  httth rather  vijited  yon.,  in  the  Defert,.  upon  mighty  and  high 

t^Iountaim,  unranged  of  men.     Tell,  I  fay,  what  the  caufe  is,  that  he  hath  come  down  into  the 

'Fent,  and  among fhyotir  flacky  :  Could  not  this  God  have  lifted  yau  tip,  and  h.tve  brought  you  into 

his  feeret  chambers  ?  Could  he  not  have  ravifhed  you  unto  himfelf^  and  fo  have  carried  you  about 

tvith  him.  that  you  might  fee  his  great  wifdome  unknown  to  man,  and  the  abundance  of  Glory.,where  - 

)hhhe  hath  his  habttation-     There  is  none  of  you  that  dare  prefume  to  fay .^  that  you  dsfervedthe 

^L^rd  his  prefence. 

.  •    There  is  none  of  you  that  dart  open  his  mouthy  ['"T'^gt  God  hath  need  of  us, 
fc  -  TeU  therefore  what  is  the  caufe  that  God  hath  vfiredyou. 
-i  <5i  Theunfeaichable  j^do^mncs  and  determinations  of  the  higheftj  &c. 
-0!.\\^^^  "Be fi lent,  thou  a^ifwerefi  before  thou  art  called. 

t»..  ^hat  is  there  none  of  you  that  a»fwereth  me  !  No,  where  art  thou  ? 

]ob,where  art  thou  ? 

Moles,  where  art  thou  ? 

Zyrom,  where  art  thou  ? 

SyraGas';!a,Wj#re  art  thou  f 

Daniel,  where  art  thou  ? 
t    ^ai\3S,whcre  art  thou  } 

tzechiel,  where  art  thou  ? 
-•    Holy,  h!>lyf.idr3S,  where  art  thou  > 
'•TeHteffer  Prophets, where are.you  ^ 

Ton  number  without  number,  (whom  the  Lord  hath  tallied  withal)  wherefore  (hew  you  not  youf 
felves  > 

All  thsfe  were  full  of  the  Holy  Ghojl. 

All  thefe  mortified  their  fiefhfor  the  love  of  God.     Yet,  what,  ^re  you  not  able  to  render  accomB 
or  to  (hew  the  true  caufe  why  God  hath  vijited  you  ? 

God  vifited  jou  fo  long,  and  fo  oft^fo  merctfuUy  andfo  ahundtrntlp  and  are  yott  film  and  igno^ 
rant?   IVhy} 

Mandata  cua  jufta  func  Domine. 

}Vhat,  was  thh-  the  cjtufe  that  God  vifhed  you  for,  that  you  Jhould  fulfill  his  Comma»dments,ani 
teach  hit  people  the  way  of falvatiin}  ' 

7  rue  it  is  Jt  was  the  caufe  that  moved  you  to  obedience.  But  the  very  caufe  why  Cod  appeared 
MHto  yoM^yoft  l^/fow  not. 

Behold,  the  Commandments  of  God  are  jufl-  &  true,  whofe  font  you  are :  if  therefore  youfollov^ 
not  the  Commandntems  of  your  father,  you  are  difibedient.  But  why,  your  father  hath  commau- 
illtdpif,.l,fr,feachyou,  t  ii  f 

WhenGod  of  very  God,  the  true  light,  beauty  and  honour  of  his  father,  conteined  or  was  full  of 
the  tmage  of  an  heaven  and  earth,  and  by  the  omnipotent,  conjoyned,  and  equal  power  .tndjfrength 
^  them  both,  ;oynedtn  one,  was  brought  forth,  and  had  his  real  beginaing,  he  determined  alfo,  in 
the  f elf- fame  Image  and  Idea,  the  due  and  proper  order,  jufi  law  and  determination,  of  all  thngt 
thiit  "were  comyehended,  which  law  and  things  togethtr  have  their  courfe  co-ejfenthlboth  in  heaven 
ivd  earth,  difii>?gu'lhingall  things  i»to  their  real  beginnings,  limitation  of  time,  and  determwattoti 
I'^iwien  tbe<r  ex.  reams.  This  order  or  law,  begun  in  thcbofome  of  the  Word  of  god,  keepethfo  hn 
proper  courfe;  and  order,  and  law  of  his  own  efiablifhment.  That  thofe  things  tbat^before  were 
wrought  in  God,  might  alfo  receive  working  and  being  fubfi ant ial  to,  the  end  of  God   his  pro- 

greffion,     v--^.-        ■     .<;-'..  n.  i       i    i 

This  IS  the  (df-fami  tlat  wefpoke  of  before,  in  the  name  of  divine  Neceffity,  againft  the  which 

no  prayer  prevailtth,  nor  refi fiance  can  be  maele- 

This  N(ceffi,ijv>^  thfcauffyO  yott  Prophets  andChildrenof  Qoi,  that  Cod  dwelt  amongft 

\  This  Nefeffny  wat  the  infirument  that  brought  you  to  thefiage  of  your  eleaien. 
•' '  This  Ne'ceifity  w*s  the  caufe  that  God  cho/e  you. 

Tl.is  Necfjfitymakethofwax,honej;  of  tar,mtlk.;of  long  ranging,  return,  of  Infidels,  Chri- 
fiiaus  ;  of  dtfobedient, holy  ones. 

Finally,  of  the  t;nperfeft  and  evil,  rage  and  roming  afiray  of  mar.kfnd,  the  trtte  number  of  fuch 
asfeturnfrom  wickednejfe,  and  are  chofen  to  eternal  joy  frcnf  the  beginning. 

But  this  way,feem  unto  you  afirange  andfiumhltng  Do^fine. 

I  have  Uid  the  B^for  j :  n     c 

A  We  read  the  premiffes,  which  fc^m^d  10  us  veiy  Pithy,  and  ponderous,  and  toll  ot  my- 


fterks. 


^  I 


„ — .   ■ ^ '   — -  .  ■  ■     ■ —    - ^-.    — .  ^ 

984  <^  true  relation  ofDt,  Dee  bis  AUions^  mtblpirits.SiC. 

A  I  noted  two  Prophets  names,  not  before. 

.•♦.♦  This  Neceffitj  is  tveo-feldf  one  {that  is  to  fay  ^the  firfi)  contemplative  »nd  fix. 

The  other^  forking  and  leading  to  an  end. 

In  the  firfi  do  dwell  two  great  and  mighty  Judges,  fufiice  and  Mercj, 

In  thefecond  dwelieth  the  [on  and  image  of  Jajtice^,  leading  on  by  order  for  the  com  fe  ofth'ngs^ 
that  are  led  on  by  the  later  ^  have  not  true  Jufiice^  but  the  image  of  fufiice. 

This  is   the  caufe  that  the  eleli  end  chofen  may  trre  an^go  afiray^  and  lofe  the  benefit  both  of  the 
endof  his  EleEiton  and  firfi  determination. 

For  why  :  v4//  things  come  op,  and  keep  their  courfe,  even  as  they  are  led,  by  the  image  of  fufiice, 
fj]fan  onely  excepted  :  whichbyreajonefhisfree'WilUdraweth  VE.K.Vic  tcachCth 

oi4t  of  order,  >  unnethfrcm  the  mark^-,  refufeth  that  which  is  goody  hinifclf.  1 

and  through  the  burden  of  his  fiejh,  incltneth  unto  evil. 

In  the  tvhich  evil.,  whtlfi  he  drvelleth  and  continuethy  lo  the  courfe  of  neceffity  taketh  hold  upon 
lim-,  and  draneth  h:m unto  the  fccpe  or  end  whereunto he inclineth himfelf. 

For,  behold-,  Although  he  be  before  fan[lified  unto  the  Lord^  and  made  a  chofen  vejfel.,  tvhertin 

If  Tic  continue,  if  he  continue,  necejfdrily  he  fijall  enjoy  the  reward  and  glorj  of  the  fanllified.   Tet  if  he  lofe  that 

Necejfity-,  a>.d  fly  from  his  own  law  and  condition,  taking  part  with  the  filthinejfe  and  iniijutty  efhis 

enemy-,  through  Satan  or  his  fiejh,  of  Necejfity  he  mufi perijh. 

If  For  as  thofe  tha  t  are  good,  tied  unto  the  law  of  goodnejfe,  are  glorified,  if  they  continue  :  ft  likj~ 

wife  are  the  evtl  tyed  unto  the  law  ofwickednejfe,  the  Necejfity  whereof  is  damnable. 

This  IS  the  caufe  that  the  Prophets  are  vifited. 

"Becaufe  God  found  them  punijhng  their  fie/h,defpifing  the  vanities  of  the  ttorld,  and  refiftitrg 
Satan. 

For  lof  the  Lord  looked  down  unto  the  earth  :  Andhefar*  them  defpiling  wickednefle  ,  fearing 
him,  and  groundid  in  the  bich  of  redemption. 

Therefore  he  thrufi  himfelf  in  amongfl  them  ,  and  through  the  ^rfi  part  of  neceffity  {tn  mercy") 
he  vifited  them. 

Take  heed(o  yoii)  that  the  Lord  of  neceffity  vifiteth  in  fufiice  ,  for  your  burden  Jhall  be  great 
ttnti  intolerable. 

E.  K.  He  IS  gone.  A  We  read  and  difcourled  a  pretty  while. 

E.K,  Here  he  is  again. 

♦,,♦,♦   Now  unto  therefi. 

What  is  (therefore)  that  neceffity  divine  againfi  the  which  there  is  no  prayer  ner  repfiance  ? 
For  why  it  is  evident, That  finnen  may  return  y  and  theft  that  erre  ^  maybe  brought  itita  the 
right  way,  and  that  by  Prayer. 
Prayei.  Behold,  no  man  is  penitent,  but  he  ufeth  Prayer. 

No  manfatisfieth,  but  he  ufeth  Trayer. 

No  man  taketh  part  with  the  Church ,  but  in  Prayer,  for  Prayer  is  the  Key ,  fanBifitd  by  the 
Holy  Ghofi,  which  openeth  the  way  unto  God. 

Ncccflicy  had  deteimincd  the  dcftrusSlion  of  Ninevee,  neceffity  alfo  faved  it. 
For  lo,when  t  heyjhould  necejfarily  have  received  reward  for  their  wickedfiefcy  they  prayed  ,  m4 
refificd  neceffity,  .,     ,/^"-    ■  >'*   / 

It  appeareth,  therefore,  not  yet,  what  neceffity  that  is,  that  Prayer  prevaileth  net  againfi. 
Note  here.  The  later  neceffity  is  neceffity,  leading  malum  ad  malum,  &  bonum  ad  bonum ;  which 
neceffity  is  that,  which  is  tyed  unto  every  thing  leading  it  unto  the  end  that  it  defireth. 

Even  as  God,  feeing  the  Prophets  for  fake  the  loathfomneffe  of  their  flefh ,  and  framing  them' 
f elves  to  the  mceffity  which  leadeth  unto  good,  of  his  meer  mercy,  in  the  firfi,  thrufi  himfelf  amongft 
them,  fixing  their  later  and defired neceffity ,  with  a  neceffity  of  his  Omnipotent  andunfpeakable 
mercy  wherein  there  dwelieth  two  things ; 

foy ,  and  Perjeverance. 
Thefe  therefore  (as  the  Trophets)  which  are  vifittd  with  Cod  in  mercy  ,  arefed,noHrifhedand 
fofiered  as  the  Prophets  were,  with  thefe  two  difies, 

whereof  the  greatefl  is  Perfeverance. 
Herein  I  teach  you  ,  that  he  that  is  firfi  eleSled  and  applyeth  himfelf  to  the  necejfity  of  his  Ele- 
Rion,  doing  the  workj  that  are  righteous  before  the  Lord,  and  receiveth  comfort  by  the  vifitationof 
Gods  mercy,  isftaledto  the  end  of  hisEleHion,  ingladnefe,  and  through  the  valne  and  firength 
ofTerfeverance,  and  cannot  fall fo  far,  that  he fifall  be  bruifed,  or  run  fo  far  afiray ,  thatht  ^aB 
not  be  able  to  remember  himfelf. 
Happy  are  thofe  that  are  ele^ed. 

But  happy,  happier  are  thofe  that  perfevere  in  their  EleEiion. 
Thefe  are  thofe  unto  whom  God  imputeth  not  their  finnts. 

Thife  are  thofe  th  at  finne  and  Satan  are  a  weary  of,  for  they  are  not  able  to  prtvaile. . 
Thefe  are  thofe  which  are  numbred  in  the  Book,  of  God,  and  whffe  brethren  tOfry  as  yet  for  their 
fomming.     But  the  altar  fhall  be  opened^  and  theyfhall  rife. 

But 


^true  Relation  of  Dr,  D^QbisAtlmSy  with^iritSy  kc,    5^^ 


But  IS  (here  a  mercy  fixed ,  and  doth  this  mercy  a/fa  fix  fujiice ;  Or  as  I  have  called  ii  the  /• 
mage  of-  Jfeftice. 

/t  is  evidoMt ;  So  alfo  is  there  aja^ice  that  is  fixed ,  ajafiice  triumphing  ^  aj'fi'cemi^htf 
a  Jnftice  unable  to  be  refifted^  a  fu^tce  that  Praytr  prevaileth  not  agtunfl-^  yea^  a  juflice  that  Hell 
and  the  Devil  are  condemned  in. 

This  is  th.1t  Jufiiccy  this  is  that  two  edged  ftrord,  this  is^that  Iron  (jMall,  wherewith  thofethat 
refiffe  their  EltHion^  or  are  not  eletied ,  following  the  necejfity  of  wick^cdneffe  ,  are  and  f^all  h 
cut  in  pieces  with,  beatenintofmall  powder^  and  be  caft  into  the  lake  of  fire  andbrimfione. 

Thistshethatfealethuo  thefecond  Hell,  wnh the  fecond death. 

This  IS  that  yon,  iyoi4  fiarvelings-, yon  vagabonds, yon  ftiff'-nec^ed  afid  fiinkjngfinners  aught  tt 
dread  and  fear! 

Hath  God  eleUed  yotty  and  do  you  dtfdainit  ? 

Hath  he  provided  a  Seat  for  yon,  ^n  Honour  for  you,  a  Crovnn  for  you ,  a}Vedding  CJarmentfior 
you,  his  eternal  glory  for  you.   And  will  you  farce  htm  to  cafl  it  into  the  fire. 

shall  the  finger  of  God  nrite  you  ,  and  Jhall  the  vengeance  of  God  root  you  out, 

"S^pent  I  fay^  and fite  from  yotir  iniquity. 

Return  into  the  way  of  the  Lord,  Icdfi-  God  feeing  your  wickednejfe^  your  un- natural  and  inhu- 
mane rebellion,  your  dtfabeditnce  againfi yeur  father,  thrufi  himfelf  Upon  your  necejfity  with  his  ju- 
fiice  and  venge^ince. 

yyhich  thing  ify^u  do^  Prtyer  prevfiileth  not^  much  leffe  is  theirrefi/fance. 

tyfre  yo:i  not  afraid  to  l^fi  the  fjujyt  of  (fod,    and  to  be  deprived  'f  the  glory  of  his  Afajejtie  ? 

Are  you  not  afraid  of  the  unfpeakjble  flamts  and  fire-brandi  of  Hell^whtch  are  prepared  for  the 
nicked  ?  "  ■ 

fVhat  (hall  I  fay  ftnto  you  ■' 

Shall  I  takjpiry  upon  yon  ? 

fyhy  care  you  not  far  your  fives  ? 

Shall  I  pray  unto  Cjodfor  you  ? 

Toupray  not  for  your  j elves. 

Sh  all  I  beflor*  goodtiefft  upon  you  > 

Hiii,  you  difpife  It. 

S'lall  I  bring  three  Sheep  from  the  \JMo«ntaini  ^  and  Hiall  I  lofe  two  of  them  before  I  cohie  Three  (hcsfJi 
home. 

O  you  mortal  men,  be  merciful  unto  your  felves.  Take  pity  on  your  felveS'   PaH  into  the  truejudg- 
.fitent  of  light  and  darkjiejfe,  of  good  and  evil,  of  eterMalG  lor  j  and  Damnation. 

For^  behold,  I  tell  you.,  that  ^od  is  ready  to  thrufi  himfelf  yea,  to  throw  himjelf  as  a  might  ftone 
upon  you, 

Agatnll  the  which  there  is  no  time  of  prayer,  nor  nothing  that  canprevaile. 

/  have  here  taught  you,  and  exhorted  you. 
Ex  honed  you  to  forfakj  your  wickednejfe,  and  to  cleave  unto  the  Ltrd. 

Taught  you  that  thofethtit  are  eleUed  may  lofe  their  eleflion  ^  and  may  be  efiablifhed  in  their 
(legion,  Alfo  that  thofe  that  are  not  eleEled  run  by  the  rule  of  necejfity  unto  the  end  of  their  rfickc 
ed»effe,wh'ch  is  rewarded  with  eternal  fire. 

From  the  which  (yod  of  his  mercy,  and  in  his  Sonne  fefuj  Chrifi^  -who  hath  redeemed  you  ,  is  jet 
ready,  ifp^  wi'l^  to  deliver  you. 

Hal  rovvgh  ha. 

A ^We  long  difcoiirfed  of  fimdry  things,  and  each  reproved  other  of  haughtineffe ,  orpride  of 
mind,  how  jultly  wi'did  it  God  knoweth. 
E.K.  He  is  here  Hill. 

A  O  L">rd  order  thele  matters  with  us,  and  between  us,  to  thy  Honour  and  Glory. 
£    jr     

Thou  E.  Vi.and  we,  receive  at  one  fountain ,  t*e  are  created  and  made  by  one  Cod ,  to  the  ^°|'^  ^  Jl**^ 

'♦♦*♦•     •'•""»  ,„,'-,  -  „j  ._  laid,  IcitDeot 

end  we  fhould glorifie  him,  as  our  Creator,  jou.  as  your  Redeemer  and  Creator'.'  gj^g  ^^  (-„^g_ 

.     Butlo,  we'^a'-e  of  Heaven  heavenly  ,  comforted  and  nourished  with  the  glory  of  God  ,  rvhereiv  whit,  or  f  rae 

(^ftnce  the  ( ^)  divtfionmade  amongft  us)  wjerrenof.  you  to  the  intent  you  may  be  proved  .y  are  thinfjbencfi- 

soveredwith  mortality  and  corruption,  to  the  intent  that  the  judgment  of  God  may  allow  you  ,  for  caltomy 

thofe  places  yoH  are  apt  to  inherit.    If  therefore  we  be  both  refrefhed  of  God,  have  our  beginning  ^„'j  jhcn''°wii 

from  God  as  from  our  Creator,  let  us  both  acknowledghis goodnt^e,   andglorifie  him  in  thework^s  ji,se  the  better 

of  our  hands  :    we-  in  our  angelical  forms,  you,  in  tie  Skjrmijk  wherein  you  fight,  by  fightingman-  of  thiir. 

fully,  and  overcomming.  A  The  fall  of 

Tet  of  us  thou  haft.,  as  thofe  have  that  are  rewarded  in  the  labour  cf  him  that  isfent  in  meffage  Angels, 
from  the  giver. 

If  the  t^  ingfend  his  ij\€efengef  unto  thef,  he  ought  for  three  caufes.  Firfi,fer  the  per fon  front 

£  e  whence 


^^6  (^  true  relation  o/Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  mtbjpirits_8^c. 


,.         whe>!ce  he  commeth^  Secondly-f  for  the  authority  of  his  meff'tige-,  or  goodnejfe  of  reward,  Thtrd^ 
mellir  -cr  to      ^7»  ^^^^  h  ^^'"*  P^  receive  the  benefit^  -mherehj  you  are  gratified. 

behon^i.cd  Even  fo  deal  ytith  m  .' .  for  w  he  may  fay  ^yau  fare  the  better  by  him^  i»  refpeSi  of  hit  labour  y 

for  5  c«iifci.     and  the  authority  that  he  ufeth  :  fo  may  we  fay,  you  fare  the  better  by  us. 

The  Ai  ge's  2pi(  let  the  heaven  and  earth  bear  witncjfe  {befides  the  benefits  of  God)  of  our  good  wiU  toward/ 

goo  1  win  to-  ^^^_     ^«f^«/wfrwf. 

warci£.\.  ^  jr^  W'nat  lay  you  tome  ^  wherein. 

....»    As  toHchingyour  rtcetvtng^as  tnuchtnq^  thj  taking  fart  tvith  Chrijljefus^very  Godn 
ts.  mnr,:  the  Son  of  theltvvig  God,  rvhofe  precious  blood  cryeth  out  continually  before  his  father  for 

1*°"  f  their  Whether  is  greater,  the  authority  of  truth ^  by  the  Church  Militant ^  or  Triumfhaut  ? 

doings  &coun        yinfrver  you  [E.K^  ^o  that. 

feis.unicffc         E,K.    By  the  Church  Triumphant. 

they  were  al-       ^  ^  ^  Svenfuch  is  oh r  author uy.   7  hertfore  it  is  greater  then  the  authority  of  him  that  is  a  fl. fti- 

'onfil°dby     lyPf'^'*- 

ihe  PrUft ,  to        It  the  Angels  that  have  appeared  unto  ycu,  had  appeared  alfo  unto  the  J ews,  faying.,  Crucifie  not 

Yvhom  he  the  Son  of  God,  they  would  not  have  dene  it, 

would  confers        for  though  ihey  believed  not  man,  yet  would  they  have  believed  an  Angel. 

himfelf.  Therefore  dtd  God  the  Father  acknowledge  his  Son  (^hnfl,  by  both  Churches :  as  you  may  read 

'r'^*^*"'^"''^  by  the  Angels  that  appeared  to  the  Shepherds.,  atknowledgtngfrom  heaven  the  truth,  that  Jeftu 

ech'^s  pte"  ter  t""  f^^  ^o"  "f  ^'"^• 

then  the  .mho      E.K.  What  is  thcChurchc:  I  did  not  think  that  the  Angels  were  of  any  Church. 

rityotthe  Tht  Church  is  the  number  of  thofe  which  a- e governed  by  the  Holf  Ghofl,   and  that  conttnuaRy 

P°P^-  fng  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy.,  Lord  God  of  Zebaoth  :  But  that  weftngfoy  the  Scriptures  bear 

7  ws^°  '  ^      v'tneffe.   7Acw/or;  we  are  of  the  Church,  and  rur  tcftimomes  are  true. 

Bo  h  Church-        /  counfelyoii  therefore  to  put  on  humility,  and  to  make  your  felvei  fubjeU  before  the  truth, 

«jTiiumphant       Love  one  another,  not  becanfe  you  are  men,  but  becaufe  you  are  partakers  of  the  heavenljr  tefti- 

and  Militant,  rnony. 

Ecclrfia.qmdt        j^  refpeB  of  thy  body  and  mind,  I  anfwer  thee,  that  thy  body  ii  which  no^  had  not  been.,  and  what 

faid    letthe'm  '^7  mindefeeth,  commeth  through  the  light  that  we  leave  with  it. 

■ivc'me  [orac-       But  if  we  for  fake  thee,  thy  body  is  not,  much  leffe  (hall  thy  underftaxding  be. 

whacpolita-  Stay  and  \  come  again. 

blc  to  my  bo-       A  We  read,  and  E.K.  marvelled  a:  the  aptiieffc  and  foundncffe  of  their  anfwer. 

dy  or  feme         £.2C.  Here  hc  is  again.  E.K.  I  cannot  tcU  <F  or  f. 

Witdom  to  my  /      ;     "i    ,         jr»  f      #         i    i 

minds  behoof.        ♦,♦.»  ^^'hen  *  hath  ended.,  and  v  hath  ended, 

A  Prophecy.  I  come  again, 

AFor.ePi.      £.  ^,  He  is  here. 

iffaplmumU-       ^**'^  ^  ^^*^^^  ""^^'^>  ^"^  ^  *'*'^  ^"^^  {which  is  at  hand)  then  cometh  the  fon  of  perdition,  0ni 
|,i.  em  ret  h. 

Ihis  we  had  Ofthefe  two  Letters  I  will  fay  more,  in  your  next  aftion. 

not  yet.  The  Light  of  heaven  be  amongff  you. 

A  Amen. 
Mifcricordia  Dei  iBcftabilis  fit  fuper  nos,  nunc  &  femper.  Amen, 

Se^uitur  Liber  2  ^ ,  ^ui,  hac  die  etiam  inetcptus  efi  a  Meridie^  her  am  eirciter  3  per  ipfum 
Levanael. 


q87 


Myfterioruni  Pragensium ©onfirmatorum 

Liber. 

?  K  A  G  /E, 
Anno   Ij8y,   Mart'n   iq. 


My {teriorum  C  R  a  c  o  v  i  e  N  s  l  u  m  Stephamcommi 
hitm  Aprilis  12.    I J  8  y  • 

,  Myfteria  Stephanica. 

?  Ake  common  Audcal,  purge  and  work  it  by  Rlodnr  o£ 
four  divers  digeftions,  continuing  the  laft  digeftion  for 
fourteen  dayes,  in  one  and  a  fwift  proportion,  untill 
it  be  Dlafod  fixed  a  moft  jed  and  luminous  body,  the 
Image  of  Refurreftion. 
Take  alfo  Lulo  of  red  Roxtan,  and  work  him  through  the  four 
fiery  degrees,  until  thou  have'  his  Audcal,  and  there  gather  him. 

Then  double  every  degree  of  your  Rlodnr,  and  by  the  law  of 
Coition  and  mixture  work  and  continue  them  diligently  together. 
Notwithftanding  backward,  through  every  degree,  multiplying  the 
lower  and  laft  Rlodnr  his  due  office  finiflied  by  one  degree  more 
then  the  higheft. 

So  doth  it  become  Darr,  the  thing  you  feek  for  :  a  holy,  moff 
glorious,  red,  and  dignified  Dlafod.  ""  ~ 

But  watch  Well,  and  gather  him,  fo,  at  the  higheft  :  For  in  one 
iiour,  he  defcendeth,  or  afcendeth  from  the  purpoie. 

Take  hold. 


E  e 


Anno 


988   (MT  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  mtbjpirits^Scc, 


syinno  1585,         CVide  hujusDiciaftionepra:-? 

^cedcnte.  De  Neceflitate  di->  -j"   Trags, 

Murtii  10.  jfvina  &e!cdione,  &c.  3 

jyedncfdnj^  a  nieiidie  ciica  5^.  A  As  we  fat  together  in  my  Study,  and  talked  of  our  af-'' 

fairs,  and  of  the  Philofophers  rtone,  £.7C.  felt  a  thing  heavy  upon  his  head,  and  heard  a  voice,  fay- 
ing, I  will  teach  thee.  Hereupon  I  fet  the  flone  in  place. 

E.  K.  Here  is  Levanael,  covered  as  he  was  wont.        • 

Levan.  ,,,,»   i-yhj  are  yon  not  pttre^  chat yu  may  learnt 

E.  K.  So  we  will  receive  at  EaJfter  ,  as  the  time  of  the  year  doth 
require. 

A  Lord,  thou  hafl  faidj  we4j||iild  at  length  be  of  one  minde,  through  thy  mercie?,  Lord  help  us 
herein. 

E.  K.  He  feemeth  to  have  had  his  lips  lewed  :  for  the  vail  is  {o 
thin,  that  it  permitteth  his  face  in  manner  to  be  perfedly  dif- 
cerned. 

Levan.  «,„»  See  that  yotitAks  the  feafon^avd^ather  while  it  is  time;  if  yon  let  this  Harvefi 
NOTE.         fAjfc'^yoit  (hall  he  dejlrow  to  gathir-iandyoH  cr.nr.ot.      . 
Thrice.  Thiicc  I  muR  come  unto  you,  //  1  finde  you  not.  , 

Lo,  f  have  do>!e,for  Icome  ^0  htore.  j  }   i 

E.  K.  I  pray  you  to  deal  with  another  :  here  is  John  ,  a  boy  in 
the  houfe,  you  may  ufe  him. 

Levan.  ,,.,.,  Thy  talk^is  hum.uie  folly  :   But  before  I  go^  Irn^lnot  be  hidden  from  yeu. 

Read  your  Lejfon^  it  is  now  a  flale  lejfon, 

A    I  read.  Take  Common  Audcal,&c.  Take  hold. 

Levan.  „,.,   To'i  are  hefi  to  do  fo. 

E.  K.  Now  he  hath  heaved  up  his  vail,  his  face  is  bare,  it  was  not 
his  hps  that  had  thofe  flitches  as  it  were,  but  it  was  in  his  vail,  his 
face  is  a  very  fair  beautiful  face.  , 

A  \Ve  befei  ch  you  for  God  his  fake,  his  glory  and  honour,  to  give  light,  and  to  make  plain 
this  Leir^n  or  C  ^nclufion.  • 

Levan,  „,,,T/>/j  C.onclu(ion  wherein  man  is  exalted  being  the  lafi  and  the  firfif  is  4S  necejfary 
/o»';('c»,ana  for  the  avoiding  of  temptations  that  iie  to  come,  as  your  garments  are  to  cover  yoHr  xa' 
kedneffe^  or  the  hoftfes  to  keep  off  theflorms. 

A  Give  us  thereforevthis  help,  this  hand,  thi^  ftaff,  this  counfel,  O  Lord. 

Levan.    „^..   HorvmHch  the  more  you  negleU  tt,  and  the  time  wherein  it  is  to  be  gathered,  fo 

u  c   '    c      ^'^'^h  the  mcr:  (haHyoH  be  tedious  unto  yoHrfelves  and  the  bufnejfe  which  y on  mttfi  fulfill  in  the 

the'phihfo-     '""^^"f^o'^^  if  jo'-t  have  this ;  it  will firjl  caufe  you  to  foifake  ;  fecondly,  it  will  plant  you  there, 

oBhers  ftone.    ^^^"^^  without  K  your  feet  Cannot  enter,  and  from  whence  when  you  are  planted,  you  fliall  not  eafily 

be  moved. 

I  fpeak^not  this,  for  that  ynnfhoHld  murmur  ^faying,  Cannot  ^od  plant  us  without  this  ?  But  to 
make  It  evider.t  unto  you :  j/^dt  G(?<i  «/«/>  his  Creatures  vifible  to  introduce  or  lead  in  (yea,  fuper- 
natural)[foicc  and  wifdome- 

Thcfe  things  will  demonfirate  the  will  and  power  of  God  grafted  injou,  that  it  is  found  perfeli. 
The  dircfs      and  from  above. 

commodities         Tor  tf  you  fay,  lo  thefe  things  hath  God  taught  me,  and  thefe  things  hath  God  opened  unto  me : ' 
fo  he  s  fto°"    ^'^'^'^'^  ^^^y  wonder  at  the  one,  they  fliall  be  forced  to  believe  the  other. 

know"!  ""^  Moreover,  they  jhall  leave  their  Table-talks,  which  objeft  poverty  unto  you,  and  they  fhall  be 
Table-  talk  of  f"^"^  '"/iJ'j  {even  tn  defpight  of  their  teeth)  what  need  had  he  oftts  ?  he  fought  hs  not  of  the  worldf 
povcity  obje-  f^flo,  he  leadeth her  ashisjlave. 

ftcd  to  us.  Thefe  things^  if  you  confider  not,  I  put  you  in  remembranccy  that  you  may  know  jou  lofe  timet  JM) 

that  you  lofe  a  benefit^  dejired  of  many,  and  fo  forth. 

Lo,  I  come  again. 
A  I  read  over  the  premifles, 

£.  K.   Here  he  is  again. 

Levan.  ,..»,   %ead. 

A  I  read. 

Levan.,,,,,  fVhat  is  Audcal? 

A   Godknowethjiknow  not. 

Levan.  „„,  /r^Gold. 

A  Purge  and  work  It.  How  your  purging  is,  I  know  not,  Levant 


(tA^tme  relation  f?/Dr,Dee  his  ABions^withfprits,  &c.     389 

Levan.  «♦„♦♦  Read  and  go  forward. 

Levari.  ,»„.,  D/afodis  Sulphur. 

Go  on  let  me  teach  you  o^zntxA\^. 

A  Take  alfo  Lttlo  of  red  RoxCan. 

Levan.  ,.„»,  Kotizn^is  fare andJimfktyiMe'tnher  felf. 

Lulo  is  her  mother. 

A  There  may  be  in  thcfe  words  great  abiguitie. 

Levan.  ,,,,„   Lulo  is  Tartar,  fimply  of  red  wine. 

9y4iidcat  IS  his  (JMercMry.  A  He  Ta  id  be- 

Darr,(/»  the  ttngeltcal  tottgue^is  the  true  Name  of  the  Stone.  tore  it  w«s 

/  come  again.  Gold; 

£.  K.  Here  he  is  again. 

J  have  710  more  to  fay  to  yon  ^  r/i/jis  the  firft  time.  ^,    ^„  .. 

£.    ilT .    He  is  P;orie.  ^  ^^  ^"^.^  "^'"^  ^^P'*  PhUofophicus  fit  ex  metallis,cuin  of  three  bcfors 

mecallis,&lupermetalla,&c.  fpokcnof. 

E.   K.  Here  he  is  again.  —  All  is  there. 

Levan.  ..,.,.  Hovf>  many  letters  are  in  (iyiudcal. ■ A — --Six. 

So  many  wayes  is  this  a  working.  4 

£.    K.    He  is  gone.  A  Divina  nobis  fcmperadfit  gratia, &nobircum  co-ope- 

ratur,  ad  Dei  Honorem&Gloriam.  ty4men. 


-\-  Praga. 
cMartii.   ai.  ■ 

Thttrfday  ,  a  meridie  circa   ^  horam. 

Note,  my  wife  being  in  g  catperplcxitie  for  want  o(  money  ,  rcquerted  £.  7<r.  and  me  that  the  cf- 
fe>ft  of  the  iinncxed  pctiaon  might  be  propounded  to  God  and  his  good  Angels ,  togive  arifweror 
counfel  in  the  caulc  ?  Hereupon  I  prayed  a  Iitde  to  the  fame  purpolc,  and  read  the  petition, &c. 

We  defire  God  of  his  great  and  infinite  mercies  ,  to  grant  us  the 
help  of  theie  heavenly  myfteries,  that  we  may  by  them  be  dire^ed 
how  or  by  whom  to  be  aided  and  relieved  ,  in  this  neceffity  that  we 
are  in  ,  of  fufficient  and  needful  provifion  ,  for  meat  and  drink  for 
us  and.  our  Family  ,  wherewith  we  ftand  at  this  inftant  much  op- 
^refled  :  and  the  rather  becaufe  that  might  be  hurtful  to  us ,  and 
the  credit  of  the  adions  wherein  we  are  vowed  and  linked  unto  his 
heavenly  Ma  jeftie  ,  (by  the  miniflry  and  comfort  of  his  holy  An- 
gels) to  lay  fuch  things  as  are  the  ornaments  of  our  Houfe,  and  the 
Coverings  of  our  bodies ,  in  pawn  either  unto  fuch  as  are  Rebels  a- 
gainft  his  divine  Majeftie  ,  the  Jews ,  or  the  people  of  this  City, 
which  are  malicious  and  full  of  wielded  flanders :  1  Jane  Dee  humb- 
ly requeft  this  thing  of  God,  acknowledging  my  felf  his  fervant  and 
handmaiden  ,  to  whom  I  commit  my  body  and  foul. 

£.  K.  Here  is  one  with  a  leather  coat  and  a  fpade,  with  a  white 
Coronet  on  his  head  round ,  hath  a  bag  on  one  fide  of  him,  and  on 
the  other  fide  a  bottle,  it  feemeth  like  an  husbandman,  but  a  young 
fair  man  he  is. 

Jane  Dee. 

Giveear  H>ito  me  thou  Woman  ,  h  r'r  not  written^  that  PVomin  come  not  into  the  Synagogue^  _.,     ..       r 
m»eh  Ujfeotighttheyto  come  l>efore  the  tcllimony  of  the  will  of  God  to  be  fulfilled  mightily,  and  to  j^ions 
comcngainii  the  World  nnd  agaiiift  the  romp  for  money  and  iniquity,  (?ut  hecAufe  thoH  h.tjl 
httml>hd  thy  felf  andhafi  refufedto  tarry  beforeme-,  as  it  hecommeththeei  I  mil  anfwer  tothy 
infirwitieSiand  will tall^wtth  thee. 

m 


39©     ^  ^^^^  Reiation  ofDv.  Dee  his  AQions,mthfprits,hQ, 

He  that  haih  hii  Houfe  hhemmed  with  4  Ditch  1  rvhich  is  deep  and,  fveelkd  mith  water  mufl 
needs  make  a  Bridge  over^  that  he  may  be  at  liberty,  elfe  is  he  a  Prifo»er  unto  the  naters  ,  hut  if 
he  want  IVood,  and  have  no  Jhift  to  enter  into  the  fields ,  is  it  not  JVi]  dome  to  break,  his  DtningTa' 
bles,  andto  fet  himfe^f  free ;  why  crjefi  thou  unco  me  ;  Behold,  letthy  Hmfe  yeeld,  and  the  cove- 
ring of  thy  body  give  place  to  the  necefiTicy  of  hunger,Behold  ,God  fuffereth  his  Elcft  &  chofcn  veffels 
oftentimes  to  be  without  Manfion  or  apparel : But,lo,he  feedeth  the  Sparrows,  but  I  will  not  reprehend 
Apromife  to     '^^^^ »  becaufe  thy  foul  is  fratl,  but  be  faithful  and  obedient ,  and  that  truly ,  as  thou  art  yoked  :  Be- 
Jtnt  her  chil-    hold^I  have  blejfed  thy  Children,  and  of  thy  feed  and  bones  will  I  btitld  a  new  ,  and  they  foall  have 
ditn.  Heufes,  andjhall  be  ferved  of  fuch  as  the  petple  fdnte,  faying,  hail  C^tafter.    Be  thou  patient  and 

full  of  repentance  ,  and  do  that  thou  haft  to  do,  and  not  that  thou  haft  done  ,  f  (7r,lo,mercy  is  with 
thee,  4»<i  well  fliallcomc  unto  thee. 
Of  Neccfliry.  Behold,the  Scourge  is  with  jou,  andefneceffity  you  m.ffi  be  tempted,  that  your  Faith  may  tfor- 

thily  be  glorified,  and  that  you  may  be  prat  fed  tn  me. 

Behold  thou  feekeft  C'"*''f^^°f  "*'->^  ''^*i<^''^**>f'^f^"i  Behold,/ would  dig  for  thee,  but  I  fhould 
do  contrary  to  my  felfe,  becaafe  I  have  given  power,  ar^d  he  that  pojfejfeth  the  earth  is  againfi  me  • 
But  fuch  as  I  have,  I  will  give  thee ,  and  it  fhall  be  fufficient ,  more  then  thy  veflels  can  hold  ,  or 
thy  dayes  can  thank  me  for. 

Confider  th^u  to  morrow  commeth  not  before  he  be  brought  in  :  Neither  canfi  thou  have  ««- 
t<7  thy  power  come  ;  But  caff  up  thy  eyes  ^  and  hope  for  better  things;  Lo,Jince  J  cannot  give  thee 
that  thou  defireji- ,  really^  yet  I  bow  my  head ,  andfo  I  counfel  thee,  let  thy  husband  arifc  and  gird 
kimfelf  together ,  and  let  him  take  bis  eyes  with  him ,  and  let  him  haft  out  of  this  place  :  For  my 
thinks  they  diftemble;  Lo,  let  him  ftand  before  Steven ,  and  let  himvifu  Lasky  ,  peradventure  he 
find  him  not  living:  But  if  he  live  he  is  dead  ,  there  fliall  you  fee  that  I  will  relieve  thee  and  do  good 
unto  him  ,  and  will  bind  up  the  Jawes  of  the  perlecutov,  that  he  may  go  on. 

Thou  art  afVoman,  and  thy  infirmities  follow  thee,  I  counfel  not  without  a  caufe  ^  neither  did  1 
R'lne  thee  tip  tajpeak_--  But  for  thy  faith  I  will  reward  thee  :  "But  one  fiorme  is  to  come,takj  it  pa- 
tiently, thou  (halt  be  the  more  whiter,  and  more  neerer  :  Behold,l  ophz^oxz  and  he  that  followeth 
me  do/h  well  unto  himfelf,  for  I  do  wellunto  thofe  that  follow  me  ;  Cafl  away  your  murmurring^ 
and  fweep  your  Houfes,  take  heed  of  Spiders  ,  and  of  the  whore  Rats.'.  This  is  the  fir Ji  time  that  £ 
have  anfwered  to  this  kjnd  in  the  latter  dayes  ;   Loj go.-. 

A  Lord,it  was  faid  unto  us  as  a  Watch-word,  when  Stevens  Meffengers  (hould  come  for  us,  that 
then  we  fhould  go.     Now  bis  Meflengersarenoc  yetcome,  &c. 

...♦«.  If  the  Bridegroom  invite  thee  himfelf.,  what  needeft'  thou  his  fervant. 
A  Now  isthedifficuky  for  money  greater,  for  if  we  had  tarried  together ,  leffe  money  would 
have  ferved  then  now  it  will  do.  &c. 
VHimata,  dl-        ♦♦♦♦«♦   Thou  hafi  asked  counfel,  I  haveeounfelledthee,  if  it  pleafe  thee  hear  me  ,  it  fisall  be  wei 
vim.  with  thee  tfthou  tarry,  but  much  better  if  thou  go  ;   I  have  numbred  thee,  but  be  not  proud,  but  be- 

tiefcimns  quit  caule  I  have  numbred,  diminilli  not  thy  fell ,  leaft  when  I  find  not  the  number,  I  findnot  thee  alfcx 
nobifcm  lo-      if  thou  wilt  any  thing  elfe,  there  are,  and  they  can  fay  unto  thee,  but  who  fpeaketh  with  thee  thoP . 
g^'W.  knoweftnot. 

E.  K.   He  is  gone. 

A  Seeinghereismatter  unlocked  for ,  weareftirred  to  ask  queftions  not  thought  of  before: 
Therefore,©  Lord,fend  whom  it  pleafe  thee  to  us. 
A  voice  .,»,,,  Sunt  alia  hora, 

Deonoftro  Omnipotenti  fit  omnisLau3,Honor, Gloria,  &JubiIatio.    tAmin. 


Note, 

Oncftoimis 
yet  toceme. 
A 

Huicfexui 
fcilicct  mulie' 
iri. 


fVednefday, 

27  Martii    Mane  circa  horam  9. 

E.  K.  came  to  me  and  asked  me  t^fC'V'"/!?'"' Copy  thereof  which  was  fhewedtohim  atO*- 
ford,  and  he  had  written  out ,  or  defcribed  by  the  light  that  was  {hewed  to  him  by  the  fpiritual  Crea- 
ture ,  he  intended  as  he  faid  to  fhew  it  to  a  Jefuit ,  and  to  ask  his  counfel  of  it,  &c.  having  a  great 
mifliking  of  our  fpiritual  friends ,  faying,'  that  they  wire  the  great  Devils ;  and  fo  the  Icfler  that  he 
d  eak  wi  thai  before,  gave  place  unto  them,  &c.  Hereupon  I  told  him  I  would  ask  our  friends  coun^ 
fel ,  before  I  delivered  any  thing  of  theiis  to  their  enemie,  &c.  He  would  prefently  have  it ,  and 
with  great  threats  moft  tenible  and  dangerous  to  me,  he  willed  me  to  deliver  it  ftrait  wayes  .*.  I  be- 
ing occupied  with  writing  a  letter  to  the  Queens  Majeftie  ,  faid  afloon  as  I  had  leafure  I  wouldgive 
it  him,  he  faid  he  would  tarry  my  leafure  :  I  told  him  that  would  fcarce  be  this  fevcn  night ,  I  had 
fo  many  letters  to  write  ,  he  thereupon  grew  in  fuch  a  rage  that  he  faid  1  fhould  not  pafle  one  foot 
beyond  him  before  I  did  deliver  It  him.-,  at  length  he  rofe  to  fhut  the  Door  of  the  fludy  upon  roe, 
I  arol'e  and  went  after  him  and  took  him  by  the  llioulders  to  keep  him  from  the  Door  ,  and  withal 
galled  aloud  to  my  folks ;  Come  here  (how)  here  is  violence  offered  unto  me,  whereupon  they  came 


(a>f  tme  relation  of  Dr.Dee  his  /iBionSyWiihfprits,  &c.     59 


in  all^and  my  wife,  and  la  afterward  by  degrees  his  fury  adwagcd ,  and  my  folks,  my  Wife  and  his 
wentaway  :  and  after  he  had  fittcn  two  orchrce  hours  with  m?,  hcTaw  on  my  head  as  I  fat  writing 
fj\{ichael  Rand  with  a  fwor(],  and  willed  him  to  fpcak ,  which  he  did  forbear  to  do,  above  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour,  as  E.  K.  faid  :  At  length  he  fpake  as  foUowcth 

E.  K.  Here  appeareth  Michael  on  your  head  ,  and  hath  bid  me 
divers  times  to  fpeak  to  you. 

A    I  dilpokd  my  kit  to  write,  and  Michael 'md  bring  the  *^t me. 

E.  K.  Here  appear  1 2  with  him  ,  4  behind  him,  and  4  on  each 
fides  of  him  4,  and  all  with  fwords  of  fire,  and  he  the  hindermoft  of 
them  had  a  Barrel  of  Glafle  on  his  back  full  of  lire  ,  the  1 2  were 
all  in  red  Coats. 

Mi:hac\  ThTrofhtt. 

Nunc  ergo  Notum  fMctttHs  Dentine  Rtx  ejuoniam  Ji  civil  as  h<tc  adi^cataffterit,  &ipjtnsmii-  ^  efdrte  caf.i. 
ttiztifuerint ,  defcenfut  ttht  mnerit  Cdhfynam^  r.eejue  tn  Thopr-.irem,  C. 

E.  K.  Now  they  all  kneel  down  abGut  him. 

They  look  piiifully  with  their  faces  upward,  as  though  they  were 
praying,  they  be  all  in  blood  red  Garments,  and  Michael  his  fword 
is  as  the  fword  I  once  did  lee  him  have  h  whofe  edge  did  open. 

£.  K.  Now  anfwer  me  to  the  purpofe  :  whether  I  (hall  have 
the  Circle  of  Letters  which  1  did  delire  ? 

Muhael Js  there  any  like  tono  (hee^O  Jehovah ««  Meavet)  and  in  Earthy  or  can  thy  eitc 

mies  rtfe  ((:\Jayin^agatnft  thee^  and  jhall  they  Jt and  ^  O  thou  ^vhofd  look^is  more  terrible  unto 
thj  AngelSy  then  all  the  fircs  which  rho/t  hafi  created,  either  in  the  bottomUjfe  fit  or  in  the  Itfe  of 
allElemental  Creatures  ^  or  abive  in  ^e  heavens  tf  they  tvire gathered  together  in  one  can  be  ter- 
rtbletoman. 

Hafi  thoti  not  made  Heaven  and  Sat  th ,  and  hafl  pit  thy  head  no  where ,  and  thy  feet  fatne- 
jphere  ;  becaufe  xvithom  thee  there  is  not,  and  vntthotu  thee  there  cannot  be  ? 

O  thou  that  hafi  numbred  the  Starrts,  and  art  Domir.ns  'Dominamittm  above  thofe  that  go^ 
vern  them  ,  and  mart  i»  knowledg  then  thetr  (jovernwcnt,  Thou^  Thou,  ffilt  thou-  fuffer  thy 
J^amt  to  be  trodden  underfoot  ?  Tiwu,  Thou,  I't^ilt  thou  correU  the  Heavens  ,  and  the  whole  feed 
pfman  ?  kVtlt  thou  drown  the  H^orld  tvith  waters,  ar.d  root  the  wicked  from  the  face  of  the  Earth? 
yVflt  thou  caft  down  the  lothfome  and  wicked  Cittes,  that  they  may  grow  in  the  terrour  of  thj  judg- 
ment ?  W»/f  thou  fend  fo  many  Plagues  into  Egypt? 

fyilt  thoH  fuffer  allthefe  things  to  be  done  and  many  more  memorAble-i  which  are  all  in  thee .-  And 
thou  permit  one  Man ,  one  Soul  to  be  thus  carried  away  with  Sata»  to  the  difhonottrtnJ  and  tread-  *^"^  ^^n\ 
ingunder  foot  of  thee, and  thy  light  of  thee,  and  thy  truth.  .' 

/f  the  kmg exalted  htm  which  magnified  Truth  before  the  firength  andTolicyoffVomen:  ex-  ^^'"'"' 
tolled  htm  before  his  Trincet ,  and  caufed  for  his  fake  the  building  of  this  Temple  to  go  forward : 
ff//;  f/j()«  no:  punifli  him  that  dtpifeth  truth,  that  preferreth  the  WJntonneffe  and  volaptuoufaejfe  •^/"•^M-JIj 
of  the  iVorld  (that  errant  firumpet)  before  thy  word ,  a'  d  before  the  (trengrhof  a  hcavei  1/  Au- 
thority :  Art  thoH  fo  become  a  little  one,  that  thou  art  leffe  then  a  King  ?  hajt  thou  turned  thy  face 
fo  far  a  fide  that  thou  fee  H-  not  this 'B^bellion  ?  (fa^  one  man  be  dearer  unto  thee  then  the  whole 
fVorldwas?  or  fhall  the  Heavens  be  thrown  head-long  down  ,  and  (hall  he  go  a»correiled  f  Hafi 
then  t^Mountaines  and  Stones  untrodden  on ,  out  of  the  which  thou  canfi  (hew  thy  Praijeand  Ho-    .  ,  . 

Kour>  Are  there  not  yet  Infants  which  may  be  ian»ilified  co  fpeak  with  the  Hfavens,  that  thou  fo  \^{^£t£ei.- 
hidefl-  thy  felfe  away  fomjufitce  ;  i^hat,  «/?<!/•,  if  thole  that  uften  cry  lor  grace  receive  it  not,  yec 
doH  thou  2ive  ic  unco  him  chat  commech  from  ic  Note. 

Sane  fiupor  Calts ,  (^  finpor  terris. 

fVhat,  are  notfo  many  Ftres  at  watt  upon  mefuffictent  to  arm  Satan  with  vengeance  afainfi  this 

/f^  Norcthemin- 

wicked  one  ?    O  thou  Bcafi ,  O  thou  roaring  Lion,  0  thou  (.Monfier,  O  thou  Whirlpool,  0  thou  ter-  "* "'  J^*^"^^* 

.  ribU  Aiurtherer. 

E.  K. 

Hsfl- 1  hoH  plac't  headlong  many  thoufands  into  HeU ,  and  dofi  thou  linger  to  rage  Upon  this  imp 

Ylhom  thou  hafi  fo  long  fought  for?  .  • 

/t  It  n-it  wiitt?n,  leaif  pcradvencurehe  findchemQeeping,and  fo  overcome  chem, 

Bt\  behold^  whom  thiu  fiitdefi  fieeping,  it  ready  for  thee  ,  willing  to  go  with  thee  .  what  fpareft 

tht:    p  art  tho'f'botd  to  five  anchor  ttj  unto  thy  M'tifitrs  to  co»fou»dj  nay^tofo  blmd  that  thou 

. .  eartfi  rot  Jeefo  great  4n  Htll  ?  _  Beh»ld^ 


~ '  ■      ■  ■ —  I     '       • '       •  I  I  r   I  ■  I   - 

392     (^jl true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ^Biorsmthjprus.b^c, 


B.hoid,  thy  Jirttmflerscry  o-ti  unto  thee  ,  and  fend  th;e  wordy  calling  thee  Mailer,  Kino. 

Take  heed  the  City  be  not  btiili ,  take  heed  the  walls  of  tt  be  »ot  lifted  up  ,  a»4  as  they  th  it  Vt'.'re 
the  Aiejfengersof  the  Ktngmadc  evident  before  his  face  that  tt  was  againfi  his  commodity  ,  to 
have  the  Templeof  tie  Lordbuilt  up,  to  have  the  City  new  fhapen,  tohave  thefyalls  madtfittng^ 
iF/ir<MS.i4.    ^ff<«;//f  u  lliouUi  hiiid;r  h>s  oaliaoe  into  Ca;lolyiia, and  the  relK 

jE.  a.  Now  the  12  (he  excepted)  fall  down. 

Mch.  ..,.,,  ArtAthy  Miwjters  h.tvctkey  not  f aid  attto  thee  ,  if  this  work.of  the  Lord  ge  for- 
ward .  tf  the  City  felt  down  fro7n  the  Heavens  may  receive  a  place  to  fet  her  fetfe  in  ^  if  the  tValU 
a»d  Rampiers  of  this  ch'it  was  bifih  above  .hall  be  placed  oh  anyplace  of  the  H^or/d  on  earth,Beho/d, 
Behold,  wtllit  not  hinder  thy  ca-ife ,  wtll  It  not  fubvert  thy  Kingdome  y  will  it  not  turn  theeoutef 
lioors  :  will  tt  not  bring  thee  to  a  ttrrthle  day  bejore  the  Lord  ? 

Is  it  not  written,  that  thit  day  fhdl  nz  terrible  to  Satan,  and  his  Angels  ? 

Andwilt  thoit  f-.iifer  a  Door  tob:»peHed,  wherein  it  may  enter  ^  it  bchovetb  thee  Satan  here  t* 
bind  thy  bow,  it  beboveth  thee  now  to  draw  up  thy  arrowes. 

it^fidifthoft  intend  to  plant  on  earth  ,  that  tt  may  grow,  time  is,  jet, novf  to  weed  out  this  Mef- 
fagefrom  abjve. 

'Do  thy  Alffengcrs  give  thee  warnin£of  thefethtr.gs  ,  dofi  thou  holdback^  thy  force:  when  the 
Portefs  will  betray  the  City  ,  wohld  deliver  it  into  thy  hands  ^  would  breaks  down  the  walls  before 
thee,  what  I  fay  art  thou  like  to  enter  ,  thou  that  lofeth  no  opportunity,  art  thou  fo  negligent  :  Be- 
hold, the  Doors  fland  open  before  thee,  why  entrefi  thnu  nit. 

Dofi  thott  want  f  re,  lo,ht  that  bnr^yeth  it  hath  fire  for  thee,  y:a^  rumor. 

Behold^  hi  o^ereth  htnifclf  a  compa yjion  ,  what  wouldejl  thou  more  ,  unto  ihefe  things  thou  hea- 
rejl  thefayiKgs  of  thy  fo  vanis  ,  which  f^y  unto  thee  O  Satan,  if  this  (ftty  be  built ,  and  the  walls 
ereiea  ;  7  hon  canfl  not  go  into  the  Holy  Land  :  iy4nd  lo,  hearefh  thou  not  them  ,  neither  dofi-  re- 
gard this  o';portHnity  ,  whence  art  thou  fo  forgetful,0  God^.  great  is  thy  mercies  ^  andfar  art  than 
above  the  fhnes  of  tnan  :  O  thou  not  only  ih'itt  eft  tip  the  eyes  of  the  w:ckjdy  that  th^y  cannot  fee 
truth  before  their  face  ,  but  the  profouna  [jhe~\  malice  and  fight  of  Satan  ,  that  where  he  fkould 
mojl  enter  he  m<ffeth  thatplace,  a^d  when  time  ferveih  hi^<  that  he  letteth  it  pajfe. 

But  fo,  fo,  God,  thou  givefi  to  whom  ,  and  where  thou  wilt ,  ardcven  as  thou  art  terrible  it 
Jufitce ,  fo  nkiwife  art  thou  wonderful  in  mercy  ;  Therefore  of  thee  is  no  end,  neither  can  be  added 
a>-y  end. 

1  his  thy  great  mercy  is  the  caufe  that  this  blafpkemons  Rebellion  is  yet  unpufiifijed ;  This  is  the 
caufe  thai  Satan  mi^etb  his  ma  k^ ,  and  is  become  weak. 

If  any  man  make  a  pot,  an  earthen  vejfel ,  workjrh  he  not,  tempcreth  he  mt ,  to  the  end  to  make 
a  pot  ?  B:it  lo,  when  he  hath  made  it ,  tnd  applteth  it  to  his  intent ,  if  even  he  againe  dejfroy  it^  it 
he  net  vain  ?  Do  not  ihofe  that  ftandby  him  wonder  at  him?  More  tatrvail  is  it ,  that  when  S*- 
tanjhcuteth  andhittethihemark.,  that  hefhotildbe  blind  ^  yea,  foblindj  that  he  kj:oweth  not  where 
to  gather  up  his  arrow  ? 

But  lo,  the  Temfle  was  built ,  andthe  (fit  y  flood  ,  althoughthe  work^  wM  left  off  for  awhile^ 

and  he  that  ma^t.ified  truth  went  with  glad  tidttigs, neither  defirirgrich  apparel,  neither  to  fit  next 
the  King^  b'4i  that  the  City  of  the  Lard  might  be  built  ,  and  that  the  Name  of  God  might  be  mag- 
nifieA  ,  fo  jhalltt  be  of  this  City  which  the  Lord  hath  fent  down  with  his  finger ,  his  unfearchablc 
and  wo.  dctiul  tmh:  ;he  Rcvilatioi.  and  Law  of  time  to  crnie,  it  fhallbe  tuiit,  it  n-i;ill  flounfh  ,  it 
I'hall  Itand  ,  it  111:,  11  endure,  it  (1;ip11  be  magnified,  ic  Oiall  be  Ipokcnot  through  all  ihe  Woild,  and 
it  iliall  notccal'-. 

Behold,  the  Kiig  of  Kings  hath  allowed  it  and  I  he  love  of  truth  ■.  is  great  with  him  ,  what  hath 
he  to  do  with  Kings  f  orwhereinneedeth  he  the  beauty  of  the  Earth  i  Doiniiu  eft  terra ,  &  pleni- 
tudo  ejus. 

IVhofoever  therefore  flickeih  unto  truth,  (hall  be  exalted  with  God  -  which  is  the  King  of  Kings 
fhaS  bemagnrfi.d.  before  hn  Counfcllors,  not  Connjellors  fcre-varnng,  but  (foanfellors  pc^  takjngef 
holy  tVill :  not  called  CoHnfellors,  in  refp  CI  of  coun felling  him ,  but  tn  that  they  are  made  prtvteof 
the  CounfelofGed  :  Befo  e  thefe  alfo  (hall  he  be  magnified. 

E.   K.  For  what  end  faith  he  all  this. 

O  ye  Infidels,  and  of  little  faith ,  which  tafi  of  the  meat  that  Was  hidden  from  the  Prophets, 
which  are  over-fhadowed  with  the  light  oj  heaven  ^  which  have  alwayes  affociated  with  the  holy 
(Jlfini/lersofGo  i  ■  wherefore  are  you  fofl'jf-ne eked  ,  pleafant  is  the  yoke  wherein  you  are  Imk'd, 
and  honourable  is  the  earth  that  you  draw  the  plow  u  on ,  for  the  Lordfolleweth ,  and  his  Angels 
drive  ,  and  the  fed  that  is  fown  (hall  be  the  btg\nvir\goi  ^lory. 

C yeefliff-ncckjd people,  why  forfake ycu  your  vifitaticn,  or  runne  a^ray  from  your  faith  that 
you  are  driven  in ,  do  yon  ^-tkj  m'ich  of  the  Lords  of  the  earth  ?  Do  you  delight  in  her  droffe  that 
harlot  money?  D»  you  give  reverence  to  the  King,  and  fiand  you  in  fear  to  break^hi^  Lawcs*  have 
you  a  greater  Lord  then  the  Lord  of  Heav  n  and  Earth  ,  have  you  any  money  or  jewels  to  be  com' 
/<irr<^cohisGra<:e  ?  haveyou  any  honour  on  Earth  ^  that  can  fl and  up  again fl  the  Crown  of  Heo- 

vent 


M'falilif   'T):l 
mtfeiieordia. 


Bhfphcmous 
rebellion. 


3  tfdiat  cap. 


jiifioniim: 


(^  true  Relation  of  Dr,  Dee  his  ABions,  mth  joints ^  &c.   3  9 .3 


"i/en?   tvherewith  (jod,  crownsth  thofj  that  Are  Victors  ?   Have  joa  any  Lnvo  fjvceier  then  the  pHri 
illuminations^  andfweet  dew  likj  com^orts^  t^ic  voices  and  prclence  ot  the  hcly  angels  ? 

Be  mindful^  be  mindful,  and  lift  tt?  pur  felves^  and  be  not  blind ,  but  confiderthe  time  of  jonr 
vijitation ,  and  thnt  rvbich  yon  do,  is  the  vork^of  a  Ktita  ,  a  Kifjir  whieh  is  able  in  power,  flrenrrth, 
And  mnjejiie  to  exalt  yoy,,  to/lren^then  yony  a>id  to  makj;  yjti  honour  able  ,  bm  i»  the  end  of  the  Vi- 
fiuition  ^  and  in  the  reward  of  your  faiihfiilnejfe,  r^orknot  to  day,  and  be.  forry  tomorrow  ;  But  Jay 
fjrroxv  ajide  ■,  and  conttmie  yoi^r  labour  ^  leafi  feradventttre  God'.inhood-rfir:^^^  and  makf  open  nhff 
ifght  of  Satan,  andfo  deliver  yiH. 

JVo,  wo ,  be  unto  them  that  are  delivered ,  for  beleevc  me  their  tribulation  is  treat. 
There  ts  harroHr  a^d  gnajhiii^  of  teeth, there  is  mifsry  and  vengeance  forever ,  there  is  horroftr 
andthc  tvormofco>:fcier.ce. 

Bat  ttvo  things  are  to  be  confdercd,  here,  whether  the  temptation  be  greater  then  the  rejifiance,  or 
the  refijtance,^  more  dignified  then  the  rtgor  of  temptation. 

Behold,  the  worl^is great ,  the  labour  ts  alfo  equal  unto  it ;  eyfnd  to  fight  againfl  the  'Princes  of 
dar'^ejfe  in  afet  battail^  reejutreth  great  force. 

TJje  temptations  therefore  that  follow  yoft  J  TKitfi  needs  be  great ,  //??  therefore  the  temptations 
kirmoumcth  your  Ilrengch  ,  and  vour dignity  isnot fucb  ascanpefift  agaixfi:  it;  JForwhy,  Satan 
Jlriveth  r,ot  with  yott,  fimplj  for  thefinne  of  Adtdttry  ,  for  the  cregs  of  Fornication  ,  for  the  cove- 
tous dcfire  of  money ,  for  the  want  of  charity,  or  becanfe  yott  are  proud ;  B^t  hefiriveth  ,  rifeth  up 
again fi  yon  and  tempt  eth  yott  again fi  the  Lord ,  and  againfi  the  Jtrength  of  his  trMth,v>heretinto  yon 
are  elected :    Therefore,  I  give  fextence. 

Lo,  becaufe  that  tempt  Mions  hath  entred  into  you  above  your  power ,  and  not  fo  much  for  thefub- 
vsrtittgasof  the  work.of  the  Lord  intended,  and  of  JiecelfKy  to  be  done.  .  skvim  quo  - 

Therefore,!  preaednot  againfi  yon  ,  but  againfi  Satan  ,  and  God  f^all  deliver  yott  from  your  cirii  f(J'e  pojfi- 
temptations  ;  Ah:d  this  fhall  b;  a  fign  and  token  ^  that  I  will  hamper  and  bridle  thejawesof  thee-  mus  quod  De- 
nemy,  that  is  to  fay,  fo  long  as  thou  (Kelly  )  art  in  this  fl:lli,  never  Oiall  there  appear,  or  vihbly  fliew  '"  ^■'.""'*.  ("*' 
hiiiii.lf  u.icochee  any  wicked  or  cvillpiiu,  neither  flialt  thou  be  haled  in  peeces,  as  thou  halt  been,  "'""j^'"' '* 
wholocv-r  therefore  apperreth  hereafter  is  of  God;  For  thy  eyes  (hall  be  fliut  up  from  the  wicked 
obj:ft.  E:  i:;telle6tu  tuo  Non  introibic  umbra  mortis.  can'iat  EiK, 

But  now  take  heed,  thou  either  perverfe  or  froward  ,  ftiff-ncckedor  difoBedient;    Thefinneisofd^i^ccps.'  ' 
thyfelf,  and  fhall  fall  upon  thee,  and  thou  lliaknot  befparedas  thou  hall  been  ;   Now  watch  and 
gird  up  yoHrfilves,  anddo  the  will  of  the  Htghefi,  preferre  and  worfhip  truth,  that  you  may  be  al-  ^^'^'^^' 
fo  n/or\htpped.   Lift  up  your  felve  s ,  as  the  fervants  of  Cod,  and  help  to  bring  fiones  unto  the  build-  ^ 
ingof  this  great  City,  that  ;'o«  may  be  openers  of  the  Gates ,  and  that  the  white  *  horfe  may  en-  >„^^*''p7   g- 
ter,  and  that  he  that  entreth  may  reward  you  with  honour,  ,  woff^a  v'ocacia 

Greater  then  you  are  in  the  dignity  of  truth,arc  not  amongfl  mortal  men,  neither  fhall  there  be  any  magna. 
4mongfir  mortalmen  that  fhall  more  defpife  the  t-Vorld  then  you  ,  therefore  hath  God  framed  one  of  Dec  faff 
you  as  afiiffe  made  affe  ,  to  bind  up  the  countenance  of  his  work^,  and  to  be  free  from  yielding  unto 
Satan,  which  well underfiandeth  that  Satan  endevoureth  ,  anJtthat  his  Mtf'i'fiers  cry  out  againfi 
this  tlorsoits  habitation,  witch  being  built,  the  wicked  come  not  to  Caclofyru  ,  neither  fhall  they  fee 
the  beauty  of  the  Phanices. 

I^benyou  have  read  thefe  things  I  come  again,  and  ponder  them  well, 

A  We  read  chcm,  and  che  places  of  Efdras ._,  one  in  the  fecond  Chapter' of  the  third  Book  of 
Efdras,zn6  the  other  in  the  third  and  fourth  Chapter  of  the  lame  Book. 

£.   K.  Now  he  is  here  himfelf  alone.  -p.^mUkde 

Michael  ...,,.  A  IVood grewup  and  the  Trees  were  young  ,  and  lo,  there  arofe  a  great  Temfefir  „i,ii^  duobmi 
from  the  North,  and  the  Seas  threw  oat  the  air  that  had  fubtilly  floln  himfelf  into  them ,  and  the 
■winds  were  ^reat,  andbehold,there  was  o>:e  Tree  which  was  older  then  the  re^,and  had  grown  long- 
er thin  that  which fhot  tip  by  him ;  This  Tree  could  not  be  moved  with  the  wind ,  but  the  Tree  that 
was  young,  was  moved  to  and  fro  with  the  Wmd ,  Mndfirool^  himfelf  oftentimes ,  upon  the  ft'fffet 
Tree :  The  forefier  came  and  beheld ,  andfaid  within  himfelf,  the  force  of  this  wind  is  great ,  fee 
this  youfigTree  heateth  himfelf  in  peeces  againfi  the  greater  ,  I  will  go  home  ,  andwill  bring  my 
ground  inflruments,^  and  will  eradicate  him.and  I  will  place  him  further  off:  Then  if  the  winds  come, 
hef})allhave  room  to  move :  But  when  he  came  home,  the  Lord  of  the  Wood  feeing  him  in  a  readi- 
iujfe,wnh  lus  Mattock^and  his  fpade,aikjd  him  of  his  going.'^hich  told  the  thing  tn  order  to  his  Ma- 
fier.  But  lo,  his  Mafier  rebuked  him,a>:d  hefud  tbus^when  the  winds  are  not  they  increafe,they  are 
not  hurtfulon;  t^the  other  ,  fiffer  them  therefore,  when  the youngTree  takethreots,andfhall  look-up 
Unto  fame  7.-4rj,his  roots  fhall  li;ik  themfelves  with  and  uuder  the  roots  of  the  greater ;  Then  though 
the  winds  come,  they  fhall  not  be  hurtful  one  to  another  ,  but  fhall  fi  and  fo  much  the  more  f aft ,  by 
howmuch  the  more  t  bey  olXZ  wrapped  toociher,yea,whentheoldtreewithereth,  he  fhall  be  a  ftrength 
nhto  him,  and  fhall  addc  uato:his  age  as  much  as  he  hath  added  unto  his  yemh.And  he  ceafed  to  dig. 
'  Be  not  therefore  haled  in  funder  ^  neither  be  -fou  of  ended  one  at  another, peradventure  Reafon 
would  fet  yoi^atide :  But  God  will  not .'.  Behold,if  you  breaks  the  yoks  that  you  are  in,  andrunne 
ay?>-4j',^ff  that  erreth  fhall  peiifh:  even  fo  fhall  he  that  fiandeth  alfo.he  de folate  :  For  why,tbe  dri- 
•*"'■  ^n^rhcminueth  not  with  oncBa:  he  Ihall  return  homs.and  fliall  not  fee  the  end  of  the  Harvefi/. 
'^  ^  -  p  f  Ijo^e 


394     ^-^  f^^^  Relation  of  Dr,  Dee  his  -^Bions^witbfprits^^c, 

Love  thcretore  one  another  ,  and  comfort  one  a?tother ;  for  he  that  comforteth  his  hrothey  comforts 
eth  himfelf :  and  when  one  is  a  weary  ,  lee  the  other,  draw  ;  For-,  why  you  are  men  and  not  yet 
frorvKcd  ;  the  firfi  is  paid  :  fo  is  alfo  the  tenth ;  Evenfo  the  tree  thar  is  grafted  heareth  fruit 
fooner  then  that  which  gronmth  ef  the  feed.  NotvpithJ}a»dir,g^  both  h^ive  their  place  in  the  Or- 
chard, the  night  let  that  yield  unto  day  ^  and  IVirjer  bear  rule  over  Sumntsr  :  Let  youth  y  tela  tn- 
to  ripe  for  jcars  *,  Solomon /4/f/;,/f  is  good  for  that  young  man  that  ohejah  the  eonniel  of  h:s  elder ' 
In  the  Ccsinctl  Hoitfe  the  things  that  they  handle  are  far  their  Common-  weMlii  •  Nocyvithiand- 
rfg  hath  hit  order  and  degree.  Caflyour  eye  upon  all  t lungs  and  youfnaU  hav:  examples  ,•  Peter  in 
his  vocation  preached  the  fame  Gofpel  that  the  refiof  the  Jpcfilesdidy  bathe  was  greater  then 
therejl-,  not  inrefpeflof  his  ^pojflefhip,  mr  in  refpeEl  of  feedings  l»it  that  Godmightks'phis 
order,  asthechiet'amoiiglt  them,  which  preferred  Velcr  frfi-  i  7 i^erefore  be  nt>tfi«bborn.  B'*t  I 
command  you  in  the  Na!»e  cf  him  that  fent  me,  and  becaitfe  you  have  \nwcd  that  iht  oiieofvou 
did  nothing  witln^iit  the  others  courfd  ,  notwichftanding [J^all you  not  be  two  comifellors. 

7 hcreftre^in  ihiitgs  that  are  to  be  Aonz,  let  the  Door  occupie  the  fupertortty  ;  The  Seer  let  him 
fee ,  and  look  after  th;  doings  ot  him  that  he  feeth  ;  For  you  arc  tut  one  body  in  this  work. 

£.  K.  He  u  gone  oyit  of  fight. 


Vr'm'it'ns  & 
Vicimte. 


tr- 


VetiY. 

Oido  faviit- 

ftus. 

Vota  ro^/a, 

/46ior. 

Vidcus. 

One  body. 


Tunica. 


It  is  afcrlbed 
lo  my  negli- 
gence, that  I 
have  not  the 
praftice  of  f- 
nod)  hU  Boo!-, 
SiflUuta 
ty£mcth. 
Liber  Znoch. 
K«te  (his 
RqIc. 


Liber  Enoih. 


Ptlonl*. 


VtrtHlaniis 
HoPer  Chrijlut 

HtifftiO. 


Image 


£^  Asconcernin?;  my  Letters  and  buJineffe  into  i^^j/^W,  I  thought  good  to  ask  counfelwhac 
Iwerc  I'-efl  todo  with  the  Letters  to  the  Queen  and  otheis. 

Michael  ,,,,>^  Gather  cut  of  the  beok^of  Enoch ,  the  Seal  and  the  Angel  of  thy  Countrey,deal  with 
4iim. 

A  I  found  a  Door,  in  the  name  due  to  Britannia,  z^nno  i  5. 

Michael  ...,,.  Thou  fhalt  eafily  find  the  truth  bji  their  appearing ,  for  the  one  anfwsreth  not  hh' 
to  the  others  fuir.Etion, 

Hereby  muf}  tbott  do  in  all. 

Kircgdomes  and  EJfates,  both  how,  and  what  thou  wilt ,  that  thou  haft  no:  is  ihy  own  errour. 

Note.  „.,„  KnAerftandme  well  here. 

when  thou  wilt  have  any  thing  te  do  in  the  fVorld ,  in  humane  affaires  ,  feek^nothing  in  SioiHo  R' 
mech,  Enoch  his  Bookjs  a  worldly  Bookj 

Veritas  inCoelo. 

[o  verjtatis  ,  in  terra, 
homini 
Imago  imagini  rcfpondet, 
Ccelejtia  autem  ptnntur  a  Ccclo, 

A  I  befeechyo". 

Michael  ,^,.,^T)ark^effeyeeldethuato  light:  F alfttm  cjuod  efi ,  veritati  malum  bona. 

But  note  in  the  Book^of  Enoch  there  are  thofe  that  are  good ,  there  are  there  alfo  thsfe  that  4rt 
evil ,  the  Prince  efdark^e^e  is  evil. 

tAnd  thofe  that  are  evil  there,  dofiand  on  his  fide :  bri$  as  his  Minifters  give  place  to  thofe  that 
are  good,  fo  do  they  alfo. 

Note ,    But  as  concerning  the  manner  hewto  jir»EHfe  ih4t  "Bool^^  Iwtuld ghdlj  htm 

fomewhat, 

Michael,' ,  Sua  funt,fua dicunr. 

A  I  underhand  this  tobe  lequired  at  his  hands  that  gave  us  that  Book. 

Michael  ....„  Polonia  te  expe(f)at ,  &  qui  EST  priceffit. 

A  Asconcerning  my  health  helping,  iruy  I  fray  here  yet  8  day es  ,  and  then  make  fpeed  tobe 
going  towaids  Poland,  as  was  prefcribcd  to  me. 

Michael  ....,,  Pojfumtibiconcidere  dies,Scpttm  — 

If  thou  didfi  know  that  which  I  fee,thau  wouldfl  notgo^but  thou  wouldft  runneiHe  that  is  before 
is  a  Gardener ,  and  he  k»oweth  the  vertut  of  Herbs :  But  the  eighth  day  I  wiH  be  there  alfo, 

„.„ ,  f^bere,  and  whivh  eighth  day, 

Michael  ,  The  eighth  day  hence  I  will  be  inCrocovh:  I  have  told  thee  plainly, 

A  May  I  then  Hay  well  7  dayes,  before  I  fee  forth  on  my  journey. 

Michael  ,  Potes  ^  &  wan  potes. 

Tlxu  haflthy  own  judgment  granted  thee ,  thereby  thotf  maifl  do  it :  But  *»  refpeB  of  the  necef- 
fity  that  requireth  thee  there ,  thoucanfl  ntt. 

A  I  beleech  you  not  to  be  offended ,  if  I  ask  the  caufe  of  the  Lord  Lasky,  filence A — He 

itaysd  long.  

E.  K. 


«-« . . .w- ...  . ,       ,     ,  _ 

(ayttme  relation  o/'Dr.Dee  his  ABiom^wiihffiritSy  &c,     395 


E.  K.  Why  did  you  not  fpealt  now. 

Michael',^  X^'tt  Bekold^he  li.sthfiid  ivitl}  himfctfe  ,  (and  thoft  that  are  wicked ,  tiavt  vfhifpered 
Httto  him^)  f'*^'h  it  [eemetht^M  they  H^fp'/e  ntCy  and  obfiinatciy(bcC'tufehe  hath  not  received  let~ 
ten  from  jo'fi)  he  ufeth  this  JilcHce. 

CMoreoverJhe  huth  not  done  .^  as  God  commanded  him  :  Buclwili'  give  hiinthcc,idc  thoii  him 
as  thou  wile.  •  •      •* 

^  I  fender  unto  thc.e  Oihoft  ijierrtful,  ^mighty  and  loving  God)  tfaaiUis  aud  honour  -,  and  will 
during  my  beinj',  )p!aile.|hy  holy  Name.  '  . 

jE.  K.    He  is  gone,  and  went  away  mounting  upward,  &:c. 

^uis,  (icuc  Dstis  nollcr,  iqiii'  humiliter  relpliccr,  &  ptccatorts  lita  duat  i^i adibus. 
nil  foil  (it  omnis  laus,  honor,  &  glovia,  nunc  &  Icmper.  Amen. 

,  \y\'.\  ,   , . \ ■ ■ ^- 


Mife:::or^'i!t 
&■  oix  Dei  pt 
[nfier  not. 


A  A  rcm:iiibrnnce  for  me. 
England  Letters. 

A.L.  His  Letters  opened,  and 
fomc  yet  kept. 

E/ficrick_  his  traiterous  dealing  to 
be  deciphered;  Counfeltor the  man" 
nevof  our  gomj',  ,  and  what  things 
fliall  be  ncedfuU  to  cake  wuh  us. 


(J^'Lofid.ty 

Aprtlis  r.       Mane,  circa 8. 

A  Prices  teci,  &t  yihtacas,  &  alias  (ex  tempore)  cjacu" 
lationcs,  proauxilio  Deiomnipotenci  necedario  in  omiiibu^ 
nortris  (Dei  prefcnpci)  tmiianc^is  negotiis,  Sec. 

E^K.  Here  is  a  tall  man  with  white 
clothes ,  with  wide  (leeves  ,  and  his  gar- 
ment very  much  pleated,  and  a  thing  like 
a  Cypiefs  fcarf  before  his  face  black  ,  which  had  been  many  times 
doubled,  and  with  a  knot  behind  him  ,  Two  others  there  are  by 
him  on  his  left  hand,  one  of  them  is  apparelled  in  a  green  thing  like 
a  Caffock  commihg  down  to  his  middle  leg  ,  and  a  pair  of  {hooes 
on  his  feet,  and  a  hat  on  his  head. 

The  other  in  a  marble  Jerkin  like  a  leather  Jerkin  with  panes, 
and  a  pair  of  Hofe  ,  with  round  Breeches  of  the  fame  fluff ,  his 
neither  ftocks  like  common  black,  and  ufual  fhooes  ,  and  on  his 
head  an  hat  as  the  other  hath  of  the  Englifli  fafliion  :  The  firft 
hath  a  little  beard  fhort,  aburn  colour,  The  other  hath  a  young 
beard  whitifli. 

,,,^..  why  d  I  yon  frovokt  me  to  indignation?  J7      J^      j^^     fceUieth     tO  ^^"^ '''^'" 

fVhy  accnfe  yof-meof  doingvproKg?  r        \  i_  i       I  • 

Have  1  not  lead  yon  out  by  the  hand  from  the  Serper4s?    IpCak  tO  them  tWO  lOOKmg 

on  them. 


nian. 


E.  K.  There  appeareth  a 
very  great  Hill  up  to  the 
Heavens  by  him. 


Carried  you  againfi  nature  thorow  the  waters  ? 

Have  I  not  held  yei*  up  from  falling? 

Have  I  not  brought  joh  hither  unto  the  Hili  ? 

This  is  the  entrance. 

The  way  is  open  for  you  afcend. 

And  are  you  not  yet  ajhamedto  urge  me  ? 

If  1  have  done  you  wrongs  xvronq^  be  unto  me. 

If  I  have  d'ne  more  then  I  ought  to  do^  why  do  you  vex  me  ? 

£s  Hef-emethto  mean  us.  £.  jf .  He  foeaketh  to  them  two- 

Jhave  jaid  unto  you  eatf  and  you  have  not. 

I  have  told  you  it  is  time  to  eat,  bat  you  have  your  own  time. 

I  have f  lid  unto  pit  ( io  before  ;  Follow  me. 

But  in  this  cafe  I  will  not  be  Judg  againfi  you. 

Thefe  two,  that  record  my  fayings  jl^all  give  j»dgffK»t  againfi  you. 

Therefore  now  unto  you.    £     J^,     He  tUmCth  tOWatd  yOU,   ^1 

Jiereyott  fee  the  Hill  ^here  you  fee  the  way  open. 

Hey  yoif  fee  no  hinde  ance. 

Tet, ..  lo,  thefe  men  ac  cufe  me,  trouble  me, 

Tietermine  you  againfi  them, 

CaU  not  at  thffe  Doerey  anymore,  uatilljBU  be  ealled  unto  them, 

F  f  2,  2^ 


^^6  ^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  A&ions^  mth  f^irits  ,^c. 


If  Te  have  (2'id  if ,  beftre  the  Lord ,  ifyofthaduot.,  it  hAdietH  tetter  for  pu. 

E.  K.  He  treadeth  them  two  under  his  feet  all  to  pieces ,  and 
taketh  his  hands ,  and  flingeth  the  bloud  of  them  about ,  and  it 
fticketh  to  the  fides. 

A  voice Wha:  is  1:  to  m:  if  man  had  never  been. 

E.  K.  He  wrappeth  up  the  place  of  their  lying  as  if  it  were  a 
Cloth,  and  putteth  or  tumbleth  them  out  of  fight. 
E.  K.  Now  he  is  gone  like  a  Whirl- wind  away. 

LORD, 

A  I  am  heartily  lorry  for  any  thing  I  have  faid  or  done  ,  \jvhichhatb  provoked  thy  indignation, 
thy  mercy  be  upon  u$»  and  not  the  rigor  of  tfay  moll  jult  Judgment.  AmeM.  Thy  Name  beal- 
waycspiajfed.  Amen, 

O  Lord,I  find  my  own  weakneffc  and  frailcy  continually ,  and  therefore  I  call  unto  tbee  for  thy 
gilt  of  Wifdome  ,  that  I  might  vvitely  and  difcrectly  feive  thee  all  the  dayes  of  my  life.  O  Lord, 
the  efcapes  of  my  lips  and  the  folly  of  my  heart  pardon,!  moft  heartily  befecch  thee :  And  if  thy  hel- 
ping hand  forfook  us,  and  much  moic,  if  ihy  indignation  workagainltus,  weaie  in  molt  miferablc 
ana  pitifuUcale,  have  pity,  have  mercy  ,  have  compalfton  onus,  Lord,  Loid,  Lord,  forgive  this 
our  offence  whatfoever;  Suffer  us  not  to  be  confounded  through  our  little  faith,  OGod.helpour 
faith,  help, help,  or  elfe  we  per.fh. 

K.  K.  Here  he  is  againe. 

cffcnce.  ♦  "^■<^"theLgrdl>adthte£o^  if  thoH  had'fi  fo  done  ^  dndhad'fi  not  tAkjn  thine  own  time, 

^  more  bad hee» given  unto  him^  andmore  hadheen  added  ftnto  thee. 

i-askj  his  Jet-        ^"^  '"""  Letters  came,  that  have  pajfed  through  the  hands  p/ Sodomites  4«^  Murderers,(f /)r<?«^6 

rers  came  en     fvhofe  hands  they  are  accurfed^)  yon  rejoice,  you  receive  comfort,  joh  determine  to  got, 

Friday  l»ft.  But  if  you  hadleft  thofe  letters  hehindyou  ,  h  ad  iovse  when  I  bad  ^ougo.    jhin  had  mj  Name 

^  been  u/itouched. 

don  ,  pi'rdon'       Therefere  is  the  Lord  angry,  and  forgetteth  not  this  effente. 

&God,  thy  For  he  that  dealeth  with  me  ,deaUth  not  as  with  A»iAn ,  for  I  have  nethingin  me  tied  Iff  time, 

j«iJg«Knts  arc    much  lejfe  hitth  he  that  fent  me, 

J"'**  Ck  O  God,  what  a  wretched  miferable  man  am  I ,  thus  to  fall ,  and  to  offend  my  God,  O  Lord, 

that  thou  judged  is  very  juft  ;  for  man  would  have  taken  indignation  againrt  his  fcrvant  that 
iTiouId  not  go  where  he  biddeth ,  or  that  would  feek  or  ufe  better  credit  to  encourage  him  to  his  du- 
ty, then  his  Mafters,&c. 

mtafiy  t  imes  hafi  thou  been  wearied. 

Have  iijcicy,OGod.  Etdcle  omncs  iniquitatesmeas,  cor  mundum  crca  in  aie,  &  avertoi- 
ram  :uam  a  nobis ,  Is  thy  fury  ini[-l3cable  ,  or  fhall  thy  anguifli  lalf  for  eter,  what  is  flcfl:i  aaddu(t 
before  thee  ? 

.,  J.         ......  T  here  ihall  remaine  the  Jltng  of  this  offence^  «»  both  your  generations,  Hntil  the  fifth. 

punM^m^t^ct        ^"dj  fwear  unto  you  by  heaven. 

Lord  be  mcr-        ,      ^P^''^  ^bis  Sentence  ot  indignation  (O  God)  againH  us.     Thouhaft  faid  in  what  hour  loever 
Ciful,  a  (inner  is  foriy  for  his  (inncs  ,  and  turneth  unto  the  Lord,  &c.    And  Lord,  I  am  heartily  forry ,  I 

ta  don  bcwaih  with  tearcs  this  great  offence,  thou  fcell  my  contrite  heart,OGod,0  God,  O  God,8«c. 

......  This  hath  added  much,  irx/fw  W/>  bound  up  the  rod,  which  J  fpoke  before  unto  thee, 

A  Thy  iherciesbe  recorded,  likewife,0  Lord,  andpraifed  from  Generation  to  Generation. 
After  this  we  lat  and  conlidcred,and  peiceivcd,  and  confelkd  the  grcatncffe  of  our  oSence  ,  how 
it  concerned  much  the  Honour  and  Glory  of  God ,  if  we  had  gone  without  receiving  the  advertife- 
mcntot  thofe  Letters ;  So  fliould  they  hear  (the  )aiid  the  King  St.  have  perceived  that  wc 
had  die  direction  ot  God,  and  of  hisgood  Angch  ,  a-.d  not  to  have  depended  upon  mans  letters, 
or  pel  fwafions,  &c,  we  both  a  like  confeflld  this  great  mifdoing ,  and  fo  framed  our  fclyes  to  make 
11  Ipccd  away  that  poinble  w;  could  ,  the  mercies  of  God  be  upon  us  now  and  ever. 


ai 


S> 


A  E.    K.   He  is  here,    and  faid.  Be  thou  fliut  for  twenty  daye  , 

",n7"toLc  and  withal  pulled  a  thing  like  a  Curtain  about  the  Stone  ,  and  the 
'^"'  Stone  feemed  to  be  full  of  the  fame  fubftance  ,  being  like  the 

froth  of  the  Sea  ^  yet  hanging  or  joyning  together  like  Curds  of 

a  polTet. 


(1 


^yttrne  relation  6>/Dr.Dee  bis  AUions^withffirits,  5(C.     397 


Mifcricordias  Dominum  in  xternum  cancabo,  quis  ficuc  Deusmeus,qui  cum  iratus  fueric,  mi- 
fericoidiampizftavitcontrirocordeinvocantibus:  Soli  igitur  Deo  meoj  fie  omnis  lan$^ 
honor,  gloria  &  jubila:io,nunc&  femper,  >rfw;«. 


A^rilii  f.  ^  Prags.  ' 

Friday^  I  cook  my  Journey  from  ?rag£  toward  CrMCovia^  God  be  our  good  ipeed,  E,  K.  I^Tho^ 
vtM  Kelly  1  &  Hugh  Brycket  my  fervancs. 


Friday.  -f-   CracovU-,  1585. 

ty^prilis  11.  A  meridie  wccamc  toCr4ro^';4,  and  as  we  were  within  an  Englifli  mile  of  the 
City,  bcinc;  a  fair  and  calm  day,  there  palled  about  half  a  mile  before  us,croflingfronuhe  right  hand 
to  the  left  Whirlwinds,  divers  one  after  another,  wreathing  up  the  duli  with  great  vehemency  on 
high,  and  flioocing  forward  Ihll,  and  then  mounting  into  the  air,  and  fo  went  Southerly  from  u»,arKj 
likewifc  fome  began  on  the  right  hand,  and  came  furiou{ly,raifing  up  and  wreathing  the  duft  up  into 
the  air  Southerly  alfo,  and  did  not  crolfe  the  way. 

VVhcn  wccame  toourhoufc,  we  found  that  a  ftrarger  wasfetintoit,by  the  Landlords  (lAi.^ohn 
Lo>ig^  the  Judge,  and  CMartw  Tlutncr)  and  having  by  me  the  keys  of  the  Store-houfe,  and  of  the 
Street-door,  I  cauled  my  (lufFbrought  with  me  to  be  fet  in,  and  chat  night  wc  made  hard  fliift  for 
lodging.  But  the  new  anti  fenced  in  tenants  gave  me  leave  to  have  one  of  my  Bedfteads,  which 
via*  in  one  (love,  and  emptied  tlie  lame  to  us,  with  much  ado. 

SMurday  and  Sufday  we  were  lore  out-faced  or  rather  threatned,  that  we   fliould  have  no  houfe 

.  there,  and  alio  one  Bofiar  his  arms  were  let  upon  the  door,  as  if  the  houle  had  been  allowed  to  him 

ex  officio.        Monday  I  made  the  Reitor  privy  of  the  Injuries  I  indured,  and  he  courteoufly  lent 

two  Mali  crs  o[  Arc  with  me  to  die  Proconful  to  have  Citation  for  the  Landlords  to  appear  on  Tucl- 

day  by  7  of  the  clock,  to  anlwerto  our  complaint. 

This  J/oW<yr-night  came  the  Lord  Z«<?^;^7  from  LAf;i;9,upon  a  Letter  he  had  received  from  me 
from  Ntfo ,  of  my  coming. 

Tuefday  (ey^prilis  16)  the  Lord  I.4»j^;came  to  the  houle, and  in  the  morning  would  have  pre- 
fcntly  call  all  their  Huff  out  of  doors,  but  by  entreaty  he  permitted  them  to  empty  all  into  the  lower  • 

ftove. 

,  In  the  mean  fpace  I  appeared  with  my  Lawyer  or  Attourney  Mr.  TetAldoy  (an  Italian)  an  anci- 
ent Praftitioncr  in  the  Voliih  and  Cracovian  Caufes  :  And  to  conclude,  I  had  a  Decree  againft  my 
Landlords,  that  I  was  to  have  at  leaft  an  half  years  warning ;  whereupon  John  Laugh  gave  me 
warning  to  avoid  at  Mtchaelmofy  and  fo  we  came  from  the  Court  or  Tovrn-houfe,  called  Prateri- 
Mot  in  Latine.  This  lame  Tuefday  afternoon,  my  Lord  Lasky  went  to  the  King  oi Poland  up  in- 
to the  Cattle;  and  told  him  of  my  comming,and  how  evilly  I  was  uied :  and  he  faid,  why  did  he  not 
cart  them  out  of  doors?  fo  have  I  now,  quoth  the  Lord  Z/<w/^-,  and  the  King  granted  the  Houle 
to  be  holdeii  ex  officio  :  And  the  next  day  the  King  was  deftrous  tofpeak^with  me. 

Aprilis  17.  PVednejday-,  I  went  with  the  Lord  Lask^y  to  the  King,  to  whom'I  faid,  to  this  in- 
tent, Cofifolatto,  pax^  &  miftricordia  1>eijit  tibi^  0  ferenifflme  Rex  :  Coram  cjuo,  Divinitw  red- 
pi  admonittonent^Ht  me fujitrem  1  cjUidnttKchumilUmefacio:  paratijfimtu  chtm  omni  fidehtate 
&  (inceritateeacum  %egiavefira  Majefiate  tran:are.,  ^«<e  mthi  divinitus  injungantur,  ^m^ 
rum  myfieriortim  hifioruts  de  or  dine  tn  ordinem  referre  sprout  occafio  dabitnr.^  non  recufabo  aliaqHt 
imniaperagere^qsiA  'Deo  &  veftra  Majeftati  RegU  gratia  fore  inteUigero^&c. 

The  Kinc  anfwercd,  Vt  de  veflra  perfena  mult  a  bona  audivi  abfeme-,  ita  jam  mihi  grains  val- 
de  ejl-  adventHS  vefier^  &  ft  cjuod  (It  tn  quo  vobis  meagratia  6~  favor,  poffit  effe  commodo  »on  de- 
tro  me  vefirnm  favorem,  &  proteElorem  exifiere :  tAtque  de  iflis  &  alits  majortbfu  rebm  aliquid 
magis  opportunt  loqitendt  tempus  poft  fejfos  iftos  dies :  quo  tempore  ves  ad  me  aecerfori  cu* 
rtboy  (^c. 

Hereupon  I  made  Courfy,  a5  was  appertaining,  and  Hepped  back  fomewhat  from  the  King,  and  fo 
the  Vicc-Chancclor  and  other  Officeis,  the  chiet  Sccretaiy  brought  Bills  to  be  read,  and  fubfcribed, 
or  alligned  with  the  Kings  own  hand,  which  he  did:  and  after  the  Lord  I.*^;  had  watched  a  fie 
time  to  tell  the  King  of  his  dehre  to  fpcak  a  few  words  to  his  Majelty  of  fome  of  his  own  aftairs,. 
and  was  bidden  to  rclbrtllraightway  after  dinner  to  his  Majefty,  we  took  our  leave  with  reverence 
doing,  and  lb  went  out  of  the  privy  Chamber,  or  rather  with-drawing  Chamber  through  his  privy 
Chamber,  wh: re  he  had  faid  MalTe  when  vvecame,  and  lb  into  the  Guard-chamber,  and  down,8cc. 

Friday^  \  tookChoftly  couafelof  T) o&or  Hannibal,  the  great  Divine,  that  had  now  fet  out 
fome  of  his  Commentaries  u^on'Tymander'^HermttifTrifmigifti. 

Saturday  (Aprtlii  20)  I  received  the  Communion  at  the  Pernar  dines  ^  where  that  I?0(^ori5  z 
Profcffor. 

Thi&day  £.  K,  the  Ghoftly  counfeland  comfort,  a*  his  cafe  required. 


^  p  S   (^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  ABionS:,  mtbj^irits.Sic, 

On  Safier  Adond^y^  very  devoutly  in  Saint  Stephens  Cliurch  £.  K.  received  the  Goirmunion, 
comyunfpeakablejgladnefle  and  conrent  ,  beingathing  (b  long  and  eatneOly  required,  and  ur- 
ged of  him,  by  ourloiritual  good  friends,  as  may  appear  by  lundry  former  a»5tions. 

-\-     Cracovii, 
Tnefday  in  Eafter  week^-, 
jipri/if  2^.   Mane  circa  horam  8.  Praecibus  fufis  ;  mcdiocritcrlongis. 

E.  K.  Here  appears  many  thoufands  of  jpiritual  Creatures,  all 
in  white  :  Now  there  feemeth  one  like  Michael,  (all  in  red)  to 
ftand  before  them,  they  all  ftanding  in  an  half  Moon  compalTe  be- 
hind him. 

Michael  4^,, „    Adhuc  feMel(ftd  Stefham  ajfidente')  Loijuor. 

Sed  fi  Aiirem^&  animitm  fitAmy  loijitette  me£  pmbtferit  fiabtlietur  fedesilli.', 

E.  K.   Now  they  feem  all  to  mourn  or  hum,  all  in  one  tune/ 
He  fpeaketh  ftill,  but  I  underftand  not  his  ipeech. 

Sin  mintu  lorjfthor  pro  me  peftis :  ulcere  enim  percHtiam  terram  Zelt  plenm [nm^  ^  7ftfii(U.\ 

E.  K.  All  are  vanifhed  away. 

A  Ne  olferves  iniquitatesmeas(Domine  JefuChri(li)qui  fpcramns  in  mifeiicordia  tua,  qui 
redempti lum.is prastiofo fanguine  tuo,e/^«>f«. 

Emicce  Domine  verbum  tuum  Evangeltcum,  ut  liqiiefacias  &  emolias  obdurata  cerda  mea  fi  igore' 
viciorum,  uc  meapeccaca  purgentur,  &  cfficiantur,  quafiinChnfto,  uc  nebula  igiiorantixcxpcllatur  e 
cordibus  meis,  SclpiricusSauitogratiiaffluantaquxLacrymarumin  pcrnitentia  Salutari,  y4»;f». 


MkhtuC. 
A  Fcriedt 
A.L.  imlligit. 


A  woman. 


Vt^um  oin- 
liuii  ergt  Sce- 
phanum  Rf 
gem. 

^eres  30. 
^ui  terrain 
gtbemaai  & 
i  1  Reges  Tti- 
buum. 
Vide  Anno 
1584.  CM»n  II 
1584  Jun'no. 
dt  ..itigdU  At' 
rum, 
A 

j/i  libfo  Enoch 
fimt  qui  tirrt' 
ui  traflanC 
malt ,  at  in  10 
Aetf  (icru 
rKajo)ib:ii  nan 
funt  t-jUs  qiii- 
bsts  cum  nobis 
res  tft. 
Vide  XI  Mmi, 

Sd  fentinto 


1585'        +        C^acoviit. 

Aprilis  24.  in  E^ifter-vtek,. 

fVedtiefday  morning,  ^ica  horam  8. 
.    Oracionibusfaitisad  Deum,  tamoratione  Dominica,  quamaliis  particularitur  refpeflu  Mini- 
Herii  Angelorum,  qui  regnis  prefident  obtinendi,  ut  nobis  prsfcriptum  erat,  &  dumconarer  particu- 
laricer  mmi^are  aliijnem,  llarim  incipit  E.K.  &  Icquiiiir — , 

'  E.  K.  There  appeareth  afar  off  a  woman  comming,  and  flie  is 
here  now,  flie  is  all  covered  in  green,  as  with  a  cloud :  I  may 
through  it   difcern  her  fair  face  ,  and  her  hairs  difperfed  abroad. 

The  place  about  her  feemeth  to  be  concave ,  repleniftied  with 
light  of  the  Sunne  :  ftie  ftandeth  as  in  a  hollow  Ihell,  or  Oval  figure 
concave. 

.,„»  Stephen,  hft  Hp  thy  head amor^ft  the  fiars  of  Heavei ;  for  the  Spirit  of  God  is  with  thee, 
and  thoH  art  become  the  Darling  of  the  Hi^hejf,  but  the  Lord  will  reprehend  thee  for  thy  fins. 

Behold^  thoM  fhalt  Jlandf  and  thy  fword  fhall  be  made  holy  .•  See  therefore  that  jon  honour  him, 
Uhnur  for  him.  and  obey  him,  as  the  anointed  and  beloved  of  the  Lord. 

For  why.)  his/piritjhdll  be  plentiful  among/}-  you^  and  ht  fhall  put  the  pillow  of  reft  under  your 
heads. 

E.  K.  The  more  fhe  fpeaketh,  the  more  the  place  is  bright, 

»*4.,The  Prince  of  'D.irk»efe(haU  He  as  ajtumbling  bUck^t»  his  way-,  but  he  (hall  Jiridt  ever 
him  without  offence. 

The  earthly  Creatures  have  not  to  do  in  thi^  receptacle  : 

Therefore  takj  heed  thou  defile  it  not. 

Jf  thofs  follow  the  rules  of  calling  ihcm^thou  (halt  fee  that  the  air  ;/»Atf/'r  habitation. 

Other  waits  irregularly  they  appfar  infuch  veffels :  Butfuch  at  are  prepared  for  th«m. 

Take  heed  {t'rHreftre)  thou  defile  not  the  place  of  the  "^uflifcd-^  with  the  prefence  of  thofe  that 
areaccurlVj. 

But  as  they  are  of  tvpo  forts  ;  f)  let  their  appearing  places  ht  divers. 

Thvfervant  is  conducted,  and  {hall  not  liunible,  but  {hall  rtturn,  that  the  nam*  of  God  may  ht 
ilejfed. 

Now  ceafe  thy  voice  for  our  prefence-,  until  the  Lord  hath  ribuked  Stephen,  in  th«  confidtration 

vphereof  confifleth  the  feal of  his  EleElion. 

VevbHm  Jhali  be  the  fir Ji  word  wherein  the  I.or  i  fhall  (heyr  himfelfmtt  him, 

ISthtlA, 


\ 


<jjr  true  9^elation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  Anions  ^  mthjpirits^  &C.   599 


Behold-,  I  am  ftfU  of  the  light  of  heave»i  asd  Ifhnt  up  and  go, 

^E.K.  She  is  gone*.  • 

A  NoK5aUtbofe  things  I  intended  or  defircd  CO  be  latisfied  in,  are  anfwcred  me  without  my 
asking. 

Milericordia,  Pax,  &  Lux  Dei  nobis  fcmrcradfint.'.omnis  autemlaus,  honor,  &  gloria  fie  Deo 
nortro,  Amen. 

Nota  Cracovitt. 

(_Ma»d>ty,  Tuefday^  Wcdnefday. 

Mdy6.,&  "jS'  £-i<r.  was  very  urquiec  in  mind,  and  focxprcfled  come  in  words:  for  that  ^. 
L.  had  not  paid  him  his  money,  long  hiice  duc^:  and  chiefly  for  that  he  doubted  very  much  of  A.L. 
his  turning  Co  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart,  and  conl^antly.      So  wHch  did  A,  L.  his  farmer  Itfe  and 
ungodly  living  and  dcalifigoffe»dhim,,zndio\oi<\  was  he  of  any  hope,  that  he  became  in  a  great 
oppicirc  of  mind  to  find  us  coupled  with  I'o  *  ungodly  a  man.  I  lliewed  ^y4,L.  bis  la(t  Letteis,  how 
he  was  in  a  Monaftery  of  his  own,  belongingto  theCalile  Ritlnvyan-y  {y\\\\c\K  he  had  now  by  a  „     ut 
ttracag;m  won  from  the  un  juft  delaying  ot  his  adverfary )and  what  penance  and  contrition  he  was  in,  ti,'i'"ij     |,  ^h 
what  meditations,  and  what  godly  puipolcs,&c.  But  £.  A',  would  not  hope  of  convcrfion,  and  them, 
thereupon  utteily  and  icfoluccly  intended  with  all  fpecd  to  be  gone  trom  hence  coward  Frage^  and 
willed  me  (if  I  would)  Co  prepare  my  LeCtcis    Wz  became  very  hlafphemous  againfi  God  Corny 
gieacgrietand  ccrrour :  whac  the  iflue  thereof  would  be,  To  great  was  th;  blafphemy  and  rebellion 
againit  God  and  his  holy  purpoles  in  us,  chat  almoft  greater  could  not  be  uttered.    I  ufed  as  quicc 
words  as  I  couKI,  alluring  him  of  Gods  mercies  alwayes  ready,  and  his  helping  hand  for  all  fuch  as 
pucthcircrult  in  him,  andcall  uponhim  in  ch"ir  crou  lesaiid  cim;s  ot  need,  audio  did  betake  him 
to  God  tor  chat  Tuefday  night,  being  paft  9  of  the  clock. 

Wednefday  morning,  as  I  was  at  my  prayers  in  my  fiudy  over  his  Chamber,  and  had  made  decla- 
ration of  this  caui'c,and  of  the  perplexity  moH  grievous  that  I  was  in  to  fee  my  friend  and  partner 
(£.7<r.)  chus  carried  away  with  fo  grievous  a  temptation,  fo  manifold  and  vehement. 

B.K.  yet  lying  in  his  bed,did  call  his  brother  Thomas  to  him, and  willed  him  tocallme  to  him  ; 
Thomas  came  (when  I  had  in  manner  ended  my  devotions  and  prayers)  tor  me,  I  went  to  him,  yet 
lying  in  his  bed  :  And  after  I  had  wiflied  a  good  moirow,  and  late  by  him  on  the  Bench  ac  his  beds 
head,  he  began  and  fa  id  fuch  matter  as  foUoweth, 

£.  iC.  A  Spirit  appeared  to  me  this  mornijig  by  my  Bed-fide, 
and  bid  me  be  quiet. 

Bad  me  will  you  to  go  to  morrow  with  both  your  fervants  to 
my  Lord,  as  fecretly  as  you  could. 
Bad  you  comfort  him. 
Bad  you  bring  him  with  you. 
Bad  you  to  go  to  the  King  as  you  came  homeward. 
Bad  me  to  board  in  the  n;iean  fpace  with  the  Itahan  *  Doftor  at »  Grrgovw, 
Perins  houfe. 

Bad  me  lie  here  every  night. 


JerdanUi, 
VenltyA' 


Hereupon  I  was  moft  gbd  and  joyful,  and  praifed  God  for  his  marvellous  merciesr  loving  kind- 
neffe  and  goodnefl";  CO  ward  us,  and  declared  my  felf  allured  that  God  had  put  out  his  term,  and  fet- 
led  the  degree  :  For  the  performance  of  his  purpofes  and  promiles  made  to  us,  for  his  own  honour 
and  glory^  And  fo  with  joy  and  thanks  given  E.  K.  for  his  courteous  imparting  thefe  good  news  to 
rae,  I  went  about  my  buhneire  intended,  which  was  to  go  to  the  Table  of  the  Lord  :  as  I  was  prepa- 
red for  it,  and  lb  went  to  the  Bartiar dines  Church . 

Soli  Deo  noftro  fit  omnis  laus, honor,  gloria, &  gratiarum  adio, 
nunc  &  Temper,  sAmen. 

Note,  I  had  in  my  prayers  allcdgcd  to  God,  that  albeit  I  was  in  great  perplexity  and  agony  of 
mind,  yet  fince  I  was  -filled  to  ceafe  my  voice  for  having  at  any  angelical  frefence^  I  laid  he  of  his 
Jivine  clemency  and  care  over  us,in  thefe  great  dcfives  might  counfel  us  and  direaus,though  we  did 
not  urge  our  requeft  as  we  were  wont.  The  conclufion  and  fhame  which  many  wayes  would  follow, 
if  this  intended  purpofc  of  E.  K.  (hould  go  forward  and  take  place)  was  to  great,  that  we  might 
feem  to  the  world,  to  have  been  led  to  that  evil  end,  by  a  manifold  digreflion,  rather  then  otherwife 
led  in  mercy  and  verity,  wherein  I  requefted  God  to  regard  his  own  honour  and  glory,  &c. 


-  ■  I  .     -—•^  — .1  — I    ■    ™„_ 

400     (pyf  true  Relation  of^Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^mthffiritsJ&LQ, 


JiMj  2  o. 

KjlioKday  a  mcridie  horam  ciiciter  6. in  manfio  meo. 


NOTE  /I. 


A 


be  cue  lift  lot 
o.ir  uaworihi- 


S.K.  (icting  with  nie  in  my  ftudy,  told  me,  tbat  after  my  going  to  RithiaM  to  :hz  Lord  Lm^^  he 
had  very  mafiy  apparitions,  and  divers  mactcis  declared  unto  hiir,  of  the  Rate  of  (^hrifteudom  &c.  d 

He  farid  (moreover)  fault  was  found  with  my  manner  of  Handing  before  Stefhen^  I  fliould  have 
made  feme  more  ample  declaration  of*iny  Calling  and  knowledge  in  thefe  our  a(5tions.  Secondly, 
that  I  did  miliakctlie  phrale  fpokcnimtomc  at  Ty^^e  ot  ih.t  rod  binding  tip*  :  For  he  faid,  that 
Mich.icl  "Dec  lliould  die,  that  I  fhould  thereby  be  alHided,  am)  divers  fuch  things  he  told  me,  and 
amongoiherthaths  was  willed  fo^fre<?£i/fo  leave  Mir^n>he>i  he j'hould  be  called  :  for,  he  faid,  our 
cEiioKsjljAll  be  iHt  off^for  fomeof  ofir  iinworthinejfe^&c.  All  which  things  were  fo  grievous  unto 
me,  as  I  was  (in  manner)  ready  to  found  ;  and  my  dillvelle  was  the  gi eater, becaufe  (aftcrafoit)  I 
was  barred  from  requiring  the  prcfcnce  of  any  of  our  fpiritual  f;  icnds.  till  Stephen  had  been  rebuked 
by  the  Lord,  and  I  had  vowed  to  obey  their  commandments  aiid  inliiuftions,  whereby  I  was  driven 
to  beieech  G^d  to  confider  my  caufc  and  grief,  who  unfair;  dly  dedrrd  to  be  his  true  Servant :  And 
being  dcfirous  to  obey  them,  liaying  of  my  voice  forihc  pn.knce  o(  hisgoodMmifiers,  I  was  con- 
tented to  off  r  'p  my  obedience  herein  for  a  iiicn^xt ;  and  ready  to  receive  this  dilireflc  and  afflifti- 
on,  as  a  pumlhmcnt  for  m\<  fias,  awaiting  his  will  and  pleafure. 

E.  K.  fai  \  It  {hall  not  be  amiffe  to  bring  forth  the  Shew-ftone, 
and  affay  what  the  good  will  of  God  would  be  herein. 

^  1  fetcht  the  Shew-Itone,  aiK;  after  it  had  been  fct  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.    £^    J^^   g^^ 

Apparition;     fpied  in  it  a  little  naked  boy  ,  with  a  white  cloth  fcarf ,  from  un- 
der his  Navel  hanging  down  unto  his  knees  j   The  hair  of  his  head 

is  fhort  as  of  an  young  child  :     [a'^d  about  that  time  cam?  the  Ln  d  A.  L.  unto  us, 

o  whofatdo«vnbyus:]   He  had  a  little  Cir- 

cle of  aire  in  his  hand  :  There  is  a  hght  in  the  ftone  as  if  there 
were  the  ihining  of  the^Sunne  in  it. 

Puer  ,„„»  Creavtt  DcHS  omnia  Spiritu  oris  fat  ejHt  etiam  Sfiritfts^defendit  (^  defendet  fuot,  f^ 

.  in  ftomine  fnofperantis, 

E.  K.   He  throweth  up  his  Circlet  ,   and  catcheth  it  againe, 
three  times  i  He  ftandeth  ftill,  and  faith  nothing  more  yet. 

Piicr  »,.,,.   ?erf.rrattu  a  Dotutiao^  laqncr- 

E.  K.   Now  he  is  turned  into  a  water  which  goeth  round  about, 
and  in  the  midft  of  it  is  bloud. 

Now  he  is  returned  to  his  former  fliape  again. 

Puer  „....   IheerJ'f  rtlifle(hisathaKd. 

jiadtheficklecf  iheHighcfi  (h'tlren^down  the  LMountaines  ;  The  Vdllejt  (haH  k  without  • 
fruit :  i/Ind  the  feed  of  man  jha/l  be  acttrfed. 

E.  K,   Now  he  turneth  his  face  to  you  [  A  ] 

Puc"^  ......  f^ho  is  hethat  the  Lordrejoyceth  tn,  or  o»  whom  the  Heavens  look.with  merry  com- 

tenance  ,  rvhofefeet  are  not  a  burden  to  the  earth  ,  and  in  whom  it  the  force  of  the  foul  comforted  ? 
f^ho  is  he  that  jhall  rejoice  in  the  Lord  ?  Even  he  tt  is  that  goeth  out  of  himfelf.,  and  beholdetb 
himfelf  faying  ,  O  thou  Carcafe  thou  art  a  Sepulchre  for  me  ;  Neither  am  I  placed  in  the*,fir 
thine  Own  beauty ,  but  that  t  he  Lord  may  be  magntfied,,  and  his  Creatures  dignified ;  He  it  is  that 
fhakethoffhtmfelf^  andputteth  on  the  ny^rmour  of  Jffli^ion,  praifngand  extolling  the  Garland 
of  the  Cjodof  Hofis  ,  before  that  great  tchore ,  and  in  deffite  of  her  Congregation  ;  He  it  is  that 
forfdkjth  his  own  will ,  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  created  him  ;  fVhnfoever  {therefore)  doth  hit  own 
viilL  IS  thefervant  of  Terditieu  ;  But  he  that  expeQeih  the  will  of  (jod  is  anointed. 

Behold, therefore^  becaufe  you  do  fj^  andhave  beheld  your  fives  ^  not  in  your  felves  ^  have  ac- 
knowledged the  power  of  God  ,  and  the  truth  of  his  Adeffage  ,  ytur  Honour  (hall  be  great :  There- 
fore fear  r^ot^  For  Jo,  This  Garland  is  prepared  for  y  01*  ■  and  reft  is  fcalsd  unto  you,  of  the  High- 
eft,  unro  yoii,  your  wives,  children  and  fervants. 

A  Bltflcd  be  thy  Name  for  ever ,  O  eternal,  almighty,  and  moft  merciful,  our  God  and  King  of 

Glory. 

Puer 


'prrphtta. 


/)■>»-  nt  acc(' 
p  .iiio  no{in- 
r^iff  ftiuiik- 


<^  true  relation  of  Dr, Dec  bit  ABions^whhfpriis^  &c,     4  o  t 


Pucr  ♦,♦.«»  If  the  Sntine  Jhine  not  in  vnin ,  if  the  Stars  move  r.et,  bm  by  variationaKd  difcourfe^ 
fnoving  things,  alrernacim  ,  to  etncKd^tl  the  Earth  fia^d  fliU.^  bec-jtufefhe  ts  fo  created:  Afuch 
ItjfeoHght  man  to  defpairein  the  mercies  and  promilcs  of  Uod  ^  ivhich  are  mt  yvithont  a  caufe^  nei- 
ther any  timeffoken  without  ejfeEi. 

I  remember  thee  {Liu'Hy)  fan  h  the  Lerd;  jindIm'dchaflentheefcrthyJi»neSf  andbehold,! 
fwear  ttr.to  thee.,  as  I  hive  dom  ;  But  humble  thy  jelf.  7  his  body  of  thine  (hall  turn  into  dafl.  Take 
heed  thereftre  that  it  ^^fle  not  the  greater  part ;  For  unto  him  tliac  dicch  a  finner  ,  vengeance  is 
judgment.  But  if  thou  nve  according  unto  my  Lawes,  and  graft  thy  fclf  within  my  will,  if  thou 
forllke  the  World  for  ir.y  fake,  and  do  the  works  of  nghteoulncfle  ;  Becaufe  I  have  calld  thee  be- 
fore mc,  I  will  addaunco  thy  yeares  >  and  will  not  blot  out  thy  Name  out  of  my  lemem- 
brance. 

Be  not  therefore  a  Man  ^  byj  thefealcd  fervant  of  the  Highefi.  Rejoyce  in  him  that  created 
thee ,  and  when  I  command  thee  to  fir  ike-)  follow  me,  for  I  will  maks  the  way  very  broad  for  thee. 

Beholdy  I  iK  r'nndfulof  my  Covenant  made  unto  thee  ,  the  feventh  d.ay  of  September  in  th^ 
year  four f'^c  re  avd  three, 

IwtH  efiabiifh  unto  thee^  that  fortitude,  both  in  true  Wifdome  and  Viftory :  ^nd  I'witlmake 
thee  mighty  as  a  Corner  Stone  in  the  Angle  of  my  Temple  '■  if  thou  turn  ,  it  thou  do  the  will  of  him 
that  fpeaketh  K»to  thee  ••  if  thou  beceme  a  marble  flone^fpeakjng  Jnflice  and  ferity ;  The  mylteries 
of  thv  Crofl'e li^ht  upon  thee  ,.and  let  thy  fonncs  be  blclVtd  m  thee. 

J  greatly  thirfi  after  Steven  ,  for  the  courfe  of  things  are  at  hand,  i 

Behold,!  will  blejfe  him,  that  he  may  leave  bUffing  unto  thee. 

Behold,!  will  place  thee  unto  him  ^  as  bis  right  leg,  and  hefhaUfiand. 

But  his  wicked  Garmerxs  I  will  cut  infunder,  yea  I  will  fend  in  the  fire  of  wrath  and  diffention  s 
And  I  will  tak^  away  the  buttons  from  his  brcft. 

/  have  given  unto  him  three  wicked  Nations  ,  that  they  may  grinde  under  him  as  flavijh  Cap- 
tiiej. 

y/hcn  [came inotse  Week^  Behold^  I finkj,  and  thofe  that  are proud^become  poor  and dsfolate. 

The  outtvardface  of  things  jhall  be  changed^  And  the  whole  IVorldfhallfay^o  here,/.;  the  finger 
of  the  highefi. 

Rife  Thereforejand  with  fpeed  go  before  Steven;  Bitt  the  League  Table  thou  {halt  leave  behind 
thee.     I  will  reveal  my  f elf  in  thy  proper  Shevo-fione, 
Dixit  quarite  viSoriam. 

A  Deo  nollro  Omnipotenti ,  Patri  totus  confolationis  &  mifericordiarum  plenifGmo  >  fit  omnis 
Honor.  Laus,Benedi6tic,  Gloria  8c  Imperium ,  nunc  &  fempcr  Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 


^.l: 


/!nno  I  jS  j." 
7  Septcmb. 
Monlaci  ll'sro 
le. 
If 


titiicidat*,St. 


Digitus  Dei. 

Hcnfa  jaderis^ 
In  meo  yrepna 
tupide  mjP'ut, 

CO] 


liote. 

Mail  21.     A  I  did  communicate,  and  this  was  the  third  time,  within  Eaftet  receiving. 
Tuefdajt  ^Primo  cum  Humbate,  &  bis  eum  Raphaeli  confcffus,  &c. 

That  all  manner  of  way  es  I  might  have  a  dean  and 
a  quiet  Confcience. 


+ 
Mail     It. 

H^ednefday,  Nyefolonicz^c,  in  Aula  Regia,  circa  horam  i  '  a  meridie. 

bJotc,  after  dinner  as  we  fatcogether,  A.  L.  E.  K.  and  I  diicourfing  offiame  of  our  matters  j 
There  appeared  over  9y4-  L.  his  head  (to  the  fight  cf  E.K.)  a  little  Child  lialf^  the  upper  part  holding 
over  the  head  oiA.L.  a  v^'hite  Crown,and  a  finger  out  of  it  pointing  toward  A,and  withal  he  faid, 

Puer AudiviteviEloreseflii. 

A  Hereupon  we  iat  oat  the  Shew-ftone  ,  as  being  ready  and  defirous  to  be  inftruftcd  »  accord- 
ing as  the  caufe  chiefly  required. 

As  I  began  to  pray  and  ifudy  ,  Domino  non  fumus  digni  ut  nos  exaudias,  fuddenly  E.  K^  faid  he 
faw  as  foUoweth. 

'E.  K.  I  fee  a  great  Hill  of  fire ,  a  very  great  Mountain  ,  and  it 
is  as  if  it  did  hang  in  the  aire  :  for  I  lee  the  aire  under  it  ,  and  I 
fee  the  Sun  {hine  on  it .-.  the  Mountain  fire  flameth  not. 

Now  the  httle  boy  that  appeared  lall  day  ,  ftandeth  on  the  top 
of  this  Mountain. 

Pucr  ..,..  God  hath  fpr  ken  unto  you  ,  and  hath  gathered  jott  together ,  andlo^you  are  become* 
ftrcng  (word ,  with  the  which  the  Nations  fliall  be  cut  down ,  and  the  God  of  Hojls  (hall  firetch 
forth  hit  hands ;  zy^nd  behold,  you  are  come  ,  and  now  is  the  time  you  Satan  jhall  reap .'.    But  Sa- 

G  g  ud 


401     (z^  true  Relation  of  Dr.Dce  his  J&ms^n^ithJfirits^Scc. 

tan  rtnvethlore  agauiB  you  ;  Behold,  L^s'^y  thou  art  l>ecome  rich;  But  have  faith :    Forttover- 
comcth  riches  f  and  [hall  beAntifie  and  firengthen  thee  ^  that  thou  fhah  he  able  to  receive  rewardfor 
thy  labour  :   for  «»j«w  «j/?»4// labour  to  contend  againlt  finne,  1  have  brought  thee  unto   Ste- 
ven j    And  I  vDtll  give  him  thee  into  thy  hands  '■  zAnd  becattfe  thou  (halt  fee  that  God  is  not  bar- 
ren ,  /  ar>i  of  fiver  ;  -  Hear  me  therefore  faith  the  Lord ,  nilt  then  that  before  thy  face  Ijhallde- 
ftroy  Steven  for  his  vcickjdnejfe  ?  mtlt  tKvu  that  J  fhallfinkehim  vcith  a  perpetual Lepro/ie,  or  wile 
thou  that  I  lliall  correct  him  and  leave  him  to  do  good  unto  thee?   Nov  thou  fhalt  fee  that  I  am  mt 
Ofilo  data,        rveak^;  Neither  that  my  -words  are  barren  or  raithout  frtiit  :    yisk^  therefore  of  the  Lord,  andbe- 
^»fl»  Lasky.ae  j^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^  it^jM  begiveu  thee  .'.    for  thot*  dealefi  with  him  that  is  a  flame  of  fire  ,  and  a  trvtt 
vtBione  edged  fword  tothervicked,  oHtoftheDunghd  I  chefe  him  ,  out  of  nothing  I  can  ftirrt  thee  up  ^ 

and  exali  tkee ,  'but  thou  mufl  firft  he  poor  before  thou  be  exalted,  read  the  Scriptures  and  judge  .', 

Nowfpeak.   E.   K.  He  is  gone. 

Infinit2&  incomprehenfibileslunt  mifericordix  tuae ,  ODcus,  &  Judicia  tua  funt  inperfcmta- 
Rilia,  homimbus, 

A.L:  Dominc  Dcus  mifericors ,  quanta  eft  tua  mifericordiaj  quod  me  fummum  occcatorem 
lanta  gratia  profcqueiis?  Iiidignus  i'umDomine  ante  faciemtuam  :  Itaque  Domine,  qu2efo,neil- 
lum  propter  me  dcleas  ncque  Lepra  percutias:  led  potuis  infpiies  in  ilium ,  utmihi  proprerte ,  &  a 
te,  per  ilium  bene  fiat.  Non  qua:ro  Domine  divitias,  fed  gloriam  tuam.  Non  nobis  Domine,  non 
nobis  led  nomini  tuo  da  glonam.  Et  fiat  mihi  fccundum  voluntatem  tuam  Domine.  Tu  I'cis  Domi-  • 
nc,  an  hypocritice  ago. 

Milcrc'mei  Domine,  milcrere  rasi,  fitque  mifericordia  tua  fiipra  me  &  fiat  voluntas  tua,  ficutin 
CcElo,fic  ctiamSc  inTerria,  Atquenomcn  tuumfitbenedK^uminfaecula  fxculorum.  Amen, 

E.  K.  He  is  here  againe. 

Puer  ..,.,.  Sapiens  estu,  I  yl.  L.'\  cr  ple»its  fpirUu  Dei:  Non  quarens  fanguine  fratris  tui 
igitur  ben.  diEiam,  fis  inter  pot  ernes  hitjusfaculi ,  &  ab  hac  die  fpirttus  meus  nunquam  a  te  difce- 
det ;  &  httc  quia  te  humiliaflinam  non  elegt  te  pne  ctufa.', 

Puer  „,,,  iAridlo,  I  vntll  correti  him  fharply  :  Ask^therefore  in  what  Language  thou  wilt 
have  me  correU  him  {for  he  is  fcarce  worthy  to  hear  that  he  may  underliand,) 

E.  K.  He  is  gone. 

t/f.  L.  Hungarice  pt-co,  ut  ipfe  audiat  ea  qus  illi  iunt  dicenda  fie  ita  Dirini  tus  placcue- 

rit  Majeftati. 

Puer  Hungarie  is  hateful  unto  mt;   For  it  is  full  of  iniquity  ;  Neiihernilll  fpeal^unto 

him  my  felfthat  he  (hall  (  yet,)  hear  me.  I  mil  open  my  mouth  tn  Latin  for  thy  f.^kj :  and  if  he 
become  obedient ,  1  will  alio  appear  un:o  him  my  felf  and  uuto  you  all ,  in  thefpuitandprellnceof 
my  Angel :  JSut  to  overcome  him  by  Miracles  it  needeth  not ,  for  by  him  the  people  are  not  edified. 
But  by  my  words  he  ("hall  wnderftand,  that  I  touch  him,  although  Satan  fland  by  him  :  unlejfe  it 
were  for  thy  fAk,e  I  would  not  \NiihdTzvf  my  w  Did  and  curie  from  him ,  for  why,I  amfiafficicntlyad- 
viled  ,    ^nd  I  do  but  keep  backjhe  fire  from  him. 

BtttgothouiA.  L.iunto  him,  andfpenk^unto  him  liberally  ^  when  he  hath  heard  me  ,  if  here- 
ceiv£  me  ,  my  blcfling  is  upon  him  of  necciricy. 

If  he  hear  me  not ,  I  can  eafily  nnlocl^  for  I  have  the  Key  ready. 

^od  the  Father,  God  the  Sonne,  {unto  whom  all  power  is  given  in  Heaven  and  Earthy  with 
the  fire  of  eternal  comfort,  which  ts  the  privj  fcience  and  knowledg  of  the  faithful ;    The  Holy 
Hod'ti  dibcntui  ^^"fi-,  ^^  upon  thee,  and  with  thee  for  this  day^  thy  [A.  Z,.]  fmnes  are  blotted  out  of  Gods  re- 
fcccatt.ipfmi     membrance . 
yl-L.  J  have  no  more  to  fay . 

Tieohtnor,  Omnipotenti ,  tremendo  &  Solis  AdorandoDeo  ,  8c  Domino  noftro  fit  omn is  gratiarumaftio, 

latii  &  lit»ra.     -^^^^  ^  Jubilatio,  nunc  &  in  omne  sevium.  Amen. 


Jf-  Nyepolonic^e  in  Aula  Regis  Folonit' 
tyfnna    1^8^. 
tjiiaii.  25.     A  meridiehora  Circiter  6. 

The  King  fent  for  the  Lord  Laskjf  and  me,  by  his  Vice-Chamberlaine  ,  whom  we  came  unto  in 
a  Chambeij  within  the  Chamber  or  room?  where  he  ufeth  to  give  audience ,  or  to  eat  with  his  Pa- 
latines and  other :  He  lat  by  the  Window  which  is  toward  the  South,  and  by  which  his  Profpe(5l 
is  into  his  new  Garden,  which  is  in  making :  He  began  thus  ,  (the  Lord  Albert  Lask^y  being  by, 
and  thereto  willed  by  the  King,)  and  faid  unto  me  very  near  as  thofe  words  import. 

St.  Egit  mccumDominiisPalatinus,  ut  vosaudirem  de  rebus  iftismagnis&raris  loquen- 

te:  ^uod  Iibentur  feci :  &  tamenhoc  confiderari  debet,  quod  Prophets  omncs  &  revclationes 
>am  dm  &  in  tempore  Chrifti  ceflavetunt.  T  amen  fi  nihil  in  tfiis ,  contra  Dei  fit  honarem  ,  eo  lu- 
beniius  funt  audienda :  Ecego  quidem  haud  dubito  quin  Deus  nur;c  pofllt  mulcis  raodis  fecrcta 
quasdamhominibus  deligere,  ad  hac  ufque  tempora,  maadatis  &  innfitatjs, 

Heer' 


(^  true  relation  of  T)tJ)tQ  lis  Mio)i5,whhfpilts^hc,    4-03^ 


■  -^'■ 


Hereupon  I  anfwered  to  this  fence  ,  alihongh  Icamiot  exprejfe  the 
_.  fame  words, 

■•■    A  Ccnfidcroiriorcinevfftrarrcsia  tria  quafi.  capicala,  in  quibus  torus  ordinis 
veftrx  eft  mcdull  i.  Primum  dc Piophctiar;S,&  Tcvch< ioncm  ccflationc-Jccundum.  an 
aliquid  in  noftris  adiionibus, vd  cxcrcitiisinfit  contra  Dei  honorcm  :  &  tcrtium(quod 
animomco  eft valdegratium;  quod,    Deo  non  pra:fcribacis  ccrcos  aliquos  raodds 
vcUcmpora  quibcs  fuii  hominibus  vcHcaut  dcbcat  kcrcta  dcccgere.    Dcpritno,  hoc 
poftimiis  vcftrcE  MajcftatiRegipa?aflererc  ,  quod  ille  Sciipturse  locus  baud  re<ftca 
plurimis  inteiligetcr :  &ab  iiiis  pcftime ,  qui  vdint  omni  ir.od^.    Dei  potcntia:& 
mifcricordi^  &  lapicntigr  prsefcriberc  ccrtos  mcdos ,  cc  tcmpora  ccrta :  aflercndo  nul- 
lorum  hiis  teiiipcribus  cfiTe  Prophctiam  ,  vel  poft  Chriftum  fore.-  quia  omncsia 
ChriftoccfHivcic  :  hoc  eft,  quia  omncsdcilloqusBerant  Prophetix  fclicct.  De  Dei  fi- 
Jio in  came  venture  &MctTiavcro,  &rcdcraptorc  generis humanifuturo  ,  (&deto- 
tailiaquam  rcsagnovimus&confitcraurChiiftiani,  complctum  &  confummatum 
cfTcChriftihiftoria)  jam  cclfavcre :  adcoquod  ilia  ncquc  jam  futura  funt  mputanc 
Juda;i ,  nequc  rcpccenda  Ibnt ,  cura  jam  funtconfummata  &  pcracla  qucmadraodum 
Prophcta:  prccnuntiabanc  nam  ob  hac  caufa  cum  Chriftu'  Jtfus  iti  crucc  pendens  kmC- 
fet,  quod  omnia  de  co  Propheda  complcta  fuiflent,  &  prarccpimus  fcilicct  omni- 
um Prophetiarum  (ante  Chnftiano )  kopus  j;im  eftct  Collinatus ,  &  Juxta  pra^fenti- 
am  &propo{itum  Dcirccemptoris  humane  confcicnnam  tfTcc  myftcnum  ipfc  dixit 
confummatum  eft :  Nam  &  Paulus  dixie  ad  Judges,  (namquc  confumm.fTcnt  omnia 
qua:  gc  co  fcnpta  erant^  dcponcntcs  eum,  dc  Ligno  polucrunt  e'jm  in  nonumento.  Et  ^  ^  ^^  ^    p, 
poft  Rcfurrcfticncmfiiana  ipfammeiChnftusiuis  difcipuiis  ipergcntibusvctfus  Q\-  Aani'.B. 
l{ellum£w/i«/^3&deilhusmonc  &rcruucditnedi(lcrentibus  &dibttantibus)  dixit, 
O  ftuki&  tardicordead  crecc^-'tmin  omnibus quie  locuti  funi  Prophetx.-Nonnc  ha:C 
oportuit  pati  Chriftus,  &  ita  incrare  in  gloriam  fuam,  &  incipicntca  Moyfe  &  omnibi;s 
Propi;ensinterprjEtabituril1is  in  omnibus  kripturis,  qu£  dtiffotrant ,  &c.  &paul6  ^"h.^^^ 
poft  itcrum  ad  coljcm  vobikum  :  Quoriam  ncccfte  im^leri  omnia  qux  fcri^td  funt  in 
lege  MojfJ  cb"  Prophet  li^  ^  Pfalmis  de  me  J 

Scd  quantum  ad  alium  lenltm  quod  poft  Chriftum  milk  cfTent  Prophctae  vel  rc- 
lationcs  ipfam  Scriptura:  planifllme  contrarium  docent.  Nam  quod  delccndum  erit  dc 
rcvclatione  fine  notabilc  ilia  Beati  Jeanai  Apealypft  quce  poft  Chriftum  era:  <  quse  & 
abcodcm  Jodnnt  Prophcta  vocatur,  dicendo^^wrw  qui  Legit  (^  Auait  verba.  fropiHtiA  *  (^ap.i.Apgd 
kujus  (jrfervat  ea  qui  tn  at  [criytafunt,  ^  in  ultimo  Capite  tjufdem  Afocalypfecs  Jiiae  re- 
'vtlationes^  ter-  eatiemitcat  Prephetia  lihrum.  Quare  manitcftumeft  poft  Chriftum 
cflc  Rcvclarioncs  &  t-'rophctas.  Prxteria  que  erat  lUa  Paulo  hda.  revclatio  in  ejus  Vo- 
catione &  Convcrfione per  ipfum  Jcfum  Chriftum,  ut  in  Apoftolicorum  apparct  A- 
^um  libio.  Cap  p.  quid  dc  ilia  dcccnncs  *  Cor»f//'0  Ccnturiano  r  *  \Aasio. 

Quid  de  WhPitro  cic  ammalibus  mundis  &  immundis.  Et  i'<a«/w  ipfam  dicctfi 

A  ^  Acis  ii. 

gloriari  opcrcet  (ncn  expcdit  quidera)vcniam  ante  ad  vifioncs  &  rcvclationes  Domini,  A 

&c.  &pau:6poft  :&dc  Magnitude reveladoncmcxtollitmc,  daroscft  mihiftimulis  '■•^^^*'■•'^■"• 

carnismes,An2clusSatanxquiraecolophizetcs,notummihifa(kumcft  facramen'um, 

\   ficutfupnknpfi:prout  potcftis  Icgentcs  intelligerc  prudcatiam  meam  in  myftcrio 
Chrifti,  qood  aliis  ficncrationibus  non  eft  agnitUTi  filiis  homini ,  ficut  nnne  revelatum 

.  eft  fandisApoftolis  ejus  &  Pro/;/;fminrpiritu,&c,ubietiaProphctaspoftChriftiicfrc 
apparct :  &cap,4,Et  ipk  dcdit  quoidam  quidcm  Apoftolos  que  fdarn  autcm  Prophetaty 
alios  vctdEvaugdiftis,3liosautemT  aftores  &  Dodojcsad  confnmmationcm  fando- 
lum,  in  opus  miniftcrii,  in  cedificatione  Corporis  Chrtfti,Doncc  occuiramus  oaines  in 
unitatcfidci  in  menfuram  ^tateplenicudinis  Chrifti,  &c.ubitam  diu  Prophetas  fore  in  »  Anscap,r. 
EcclclhC fjrijlt  poft Chri ft u apparct. D(?flff  occutramus  omncs  in  unitate  fidei,&c.quod  Ph'i.ppi  dTil. 
nondum  poft  Chriftum  faifiumfuifle  bene  fimus  Sejamhsec  rotate  noftra  maximefu-  ttriiocoinio- 
mus circa  ncgotium  fidcidikordcs  maxin-e  videntur  cflc  ncccflaria?  non  Prophetse  fo-  "ctdcI/^'  ' 
lum  kd  ctiam  Rcvclationes  valdc  exprefle  de  Myfteriis  Divinus.  Et  de  locotione  An- 
gelica *3idPhilippm,  &  ejus  de  loco  in  locum  invilibile  quad  tranflatione  per  Spiri- 

Gg  2  licuut^ 


4 04     <?jf  ^^^^  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^ mthfptits.^c, 

ritum  Domini)  quod  puccnduai  eft.  Et  dc  Piophetis  poft  Chriftum  tcmpora  tcftifica- 
tvii  A£lum  undecimum  caput  ,  ubi  legitnus  quod  codcm  tempore  quo  primum  difci- 
puli  Chiifti  Amiechia  cognominaicntur  Chrillianijfuperdeneiunc  ab  ■ferifeijma  Pro- 
phctc-c  4ntiochiam^  &  furgcns  unus  ex  eis  nomine  Agabtu  ,  (ignificabat  per  fpiritum, 
famem  magnam  futuram  univcrfo  otbe  tcrrarum,  qua*  f adum  eft  fub  CUuciio ,  ad  fe- 
cundumautcm  veftrse  Majcftatis  Regis  Capitulum  ,  fie  rcfpondeo  quod  coram  Deo 
Stbcatisejus  Angelis,  r.flerequodconfcientiamca  nihil  adhucdeprchendic,Notivir, 
vcklijrdicarepocuiCjnequcpoflTu  in  omnibus  noftris  adiionibus,  vel  illanrm  aliqua, 
quod  (i:  contra  Dei,  honorcm,  vcl  glcrianij  Immo,  quod  ad  Dei  honorem  &  glonam 
valdc  fpccicnt,  poffimus. 

Dcniquc  tcrtio  in  loco  quod  cum  magna  &  vera:  pia  Rcgiaquc  &  dircreiionc  exiftU 
tis,  mc  Dcum  Omnipotentemiis  temporibuspoflemodisfuisvaiiis,  l:ominibusqui- 
buPdam  fua  manifcftarc  myfteria  &  fecrcta.  Valde  letor :  &  co  magis ,  quod  tarn  ex 
noftris  prxccritis  id  conftarc  potucric  multis  Adionibus-,  quam  ex  futuris:  quibus  inter 
eftc  &:  adtflcprxrens(li  ita  illi  vilum  fucrit)  vcftra  pofTu  MajcftasRegia.  "  Et  pra:- 
"  tentarum  noftrorum  Adionum  librus  24,  paratus  lum  (quccunqne  vcftra?  Icrcnif- 
"  fima? Ma jeftaiiplacucrit tempore,)  vidgndos  exhibcic;  quorum  qi:a'dam  Latina 
•'  lingua,GrKC3  alise,  alije  Angiica  lingua,  fed  ex  maxima  parte  Anglica  funt  Confcri- 
*'•  pis  ipfaeadiones  Angelorum,r;5^.  Dcibonorum  Inftrudiones,  admonitiones,  cx- 
«'  bortationcSjCcncioncSjProphctia\&quocur;qicaiio funt. Ccnlencxncminc nobis 
*'  fadsRevdationesjreahsvelvtrbales,  &pcripacium  jarn  trium  fere  annoruma 
"  nobis  receptee  &  annotate,  &c. 


-\-      Nyefoloniu£    in    Aula    Regia  fnfer.te  ipfg 
Die  Luns  Stephana  Rcge-,  &  A.  L,  &c. 

<^May  27.    Mane,  horam  7.  circiter.    In  camera  prjvata  Regis. 
In  laftde  qui  Omr^ipotens  ■,  Seinj)iter>>£,  Fera -,  &  utii  D'H*  .,  o  m  mifericors  Pater  mi,  qui  me de  VatriA 

AugdMvnhi  mexftmejtA  contrein:e  co-nccptaniAhc'-A  ^  perAmc/aj  tuos  h:;ros  admo>jifli-,  &  per  eofdem  ,  tnde^ 
addnif.iit  mc  cumZ^xre ■,  Libtris'^  ^  Famtlia  mea  i/:f^*  duobw  ,  egyedi  juffifii :  e  tgredietites  nos-, 
p'^xfoipiHtne-  ex  fertihpu  maris,  cjuaft  tniracHlofe  liherAfli  :  ft  cjui  cx  homicidtartim&  Hereticortimmanibui 
''cumeodm    ^^'^   ^' f*''*''<i^bM  vartii  nos  cxpedtmtfit :  ht  q:ti multis  ms modis  {parttm  mbu  cogr.iiis^  partimin- 

*  A.L,  £.1\,,     C!?gnitis  ")  aptriculii  &  mortefrttexifti ,  abeo  tempore,  quod  adtutt  [ecreta  judicta&   negotia 

tej}:ficat>dd  ,  trAlinndu  &  pmmnTenda  nos  vocafi'  :  Idea  propter  hanc  tttam  taut  am  ■  &  tttam  ad- 
n/irabilc  mifer'cordtam  ;  trumprt^lis  tui  a  ?it/bii  d.beri  landes  c^  gratiM  humiUime  agKofcamiu. 
O  tu  Pater  nofler  Cfcmeyitijfime  qftt  *  kcs  duos  ;  vwchIo  tm  Divim  artltjfime  copulafit :  &  quaji 

*  LS&e.i^  nnum  ex  duohtu    ejfe   voimfit.    O  tu  frrtijfime  Dem  mens  qui  ha^ic  tu/imtasky ,  quaft  Klh- 

letam  meum  catittffimum ,  ammofum,  &  mesirn  amamijfimum  ^  robit  adjunxijli  :  virum  C/«- 
thelica  tua  &  orthodox  a  Keltgionii  umnntifjimam  cr  Anti-chriftta»ifmi  omnis  acerrimum  hefiem; 
"Deuique  0  Sapter,t'^me ,  Pore^.t'Jft*Ke&  0;time  Dem  ,  &  Pater  mens,  qui  tuis  mox  irtcipien- 
dis  Regiis ,  magnis  mirifict  Conaitbm  -,  quemfatiebat  Regem  ,  ta/,dem  iuvenifli  Stcphaniim,  tuum 
futurum  Billatonm;  q  nist:io  mutui  ^  &  jitffit  ex  (tnimis  ,  totis  fuisveribus  ■,  &  ntaxtmo  zelo 
obedirevelit:   Cr  cut  non  honorem  &  obeJieyitiam  (jr  cxhibtemtu  ■,  in  mandatis  dedijii;  &  propter 
quern  labores  (^tibin6tas')ut  [nbiremHS  ^  ^ujtenueremtu  •  flatutfit  :   &  ad  quern,  pofi  laborio- 
fas  peregrtiiatior.es  noftrt  multtplices  qtiidem  ,  prater-]  tj\ie?7ji  s  f,iB  as  ,  direUas  aliquas ,  alias 
ante,  (  humano  judicto  )  qt<aft  reirog,  ados  ,  tuam  maximam  gratiam  ,  favore  :   &  auxilta  inco- 
lumnies  &  [alvos  nos  perdnxiflt:  Nos  qua fi  hie  tuos  -^  tuo  Nomine    &  unamente  eoKvententes  ^ 
tnadignerts  Patctna  rmfericordta  ,  a  totttts  vit£  mtAommbus  pttrgare  fpurdliis  :   Et  Chariffimi 
tufPilii  Domtnt  <y  Redcmptorii  Nomini  Jciu  Clii  ifti  intercedonibin  meritis ,  nobis^  Condona  quiC' 
qtudcontrtk  Leges  tuas  SanElas  (^Jtiflas,  volentes  ,  vel  nefcii,   vtl  negltgentes ,  verba-,  fail* 
vel cngitatione  ad  hanc  ufque  hor^m  cffenderimm  omnes  (^  pnguli ,  ttt  ttbi  jam  p'ffimtu  majfa  pura 
(^  iizima  cfferri :  una  D'Viia&  abuttdantij/ina  fermnanda  gratia;  &  tute  charitatis     ignein 
cordibus  njihis  per  te  acee*!pj ,  quaji  qtudem  proportionis  &  facriinj  emplo  tuo  effciamur  panes. 
Et  (ic  nobis  interim  Filius'tutu  'Dominw  noftris  ]z'ms  ChriHus  'Panis  vitte  :  quern gufiandofua- 
vffuntsm  ,  etr  fldet  veribm  tranfgladiendo  vivaciffimum   t^Manna  eundem   habsamus  nobifcum  in 
perpetuam  ,  mitte  tgitur  nunc  Luce  (jr  Veritattm  tuam  o  Dem  Omntpotens  fempiterna,FtV<£)  & 
Vera,  c^  tuo  Ster  haiio  (  nofler  a'-item  Serewffimo  Cratieftffimoque  Regt  )   appareat ,  Te  Deiim  no- 
ftiHm  veium  vivam,  Omnipotentem  Do6toiem  nodrum  in  lis  adionibus  &  Myikriis  cffe  wf  <?wf « 
(  Itcet  peccatis  cbmxium  )  voto  &•  Conatu  mtgno  ifidele  tuam  ^  ftncerium  effr  fervatunt :  omnia- 
tjue  tuAjajfamihtmax'tme  ejfe  Cure  :   nofque  ftngulos  fingularibtts  iate  (tutem  muadi   exordium 
fr^ordinatesefftmunerthus ,  tHtKoSanUofervitiotra^andi:,  (^c, 

E.  K 


E.  K.  Nihil  poft  primas  prseces  apparebat. 

A  Bievcs  fecundas  kci,  &  adhuc  nihil  apparebat  .•. 

Terciasadjcci,  etinm  breves. 

Poli  tcrcias  ex  lapide  quidcm  Calor  in  facicm  ipfius. 

£.    K.   Exire  vidtbatur. 

Circa  lapidis  oram  Sc  fimbriam  rubicundiis  viridis  circulus  appa- 
rebat. 

£.  K.  Jim  video  hominem  albis  indutum  veftibus,  &  fuccindis 
facie  longa  Iparils  crinibus,  &  a  deus  notu  quafi  undantibus  ,  Sc 
dexter  pes  flans  fuper  magnum  lapidem  rotundam,  Sc  finifter  fuper 
aquani,  Sc  pofl:  dorium  e)us  magna  lux  eft :  Nunc  video  terram  lub 
pedibus  e)us,  fed  quafi  in  aere  videtur  elTe  tam  lapis  ipfe  quam  a- 
qua  ilia. 

A  Sitbcnediftus  Dciis  noflcr  ,  &  lia:  voluntas  ejus. 

Aqvx  carfus  (qui  verius  Occidentem  el))  pedem  ejus  videtur  fecundum  fc  prigs  defcrre, 
Vi'letur  lite  longo  ameclT;  cumiiuueor  taciciiiejas  interdumunaappareteUe  interdum  tres  fad- 
es &  ita  confufo  quoi!,T.r.  iiiodo. 

E.  K.   Audio  magnam  vocem  Dicentem  ,  Vetii  ^  Vidi. 

E.  K.  Dcfcendit  juwi  alter  ad  ilium  quafi  Globus  l2;nius  cum 
facie  eminent!,  &  ab  ejub  corpore  quail  verga  arundinea  videtur  e- 
manare. 

♦♦..,»  J»fpex' ,  &  examinavi^  &  ecce^  Nulla  efi  Juflicia.  Anilke  mnla 

Vox  ,»,.»  Interet  aqua  in  mare,  &  fiat  ftilfa  ,  cji^ia  ecce  tertia  viola  efl-  plena.  diliteramuf- 

E.K.    Jam  venit  ignis ,  &  ilium  totum  circundat,  aliquo  mini- ^^'^^^^''*'"* 
mo  :  Circa  illud  reledo  intervallo  fibi  proximo. 

Vox  ,...,   mienf'  a. 

iji'tenfttravi  ^ftj^-.llum  efl  (y:)  qitiy>qnaginta  duo, 

iu^/?  ecce,  fumplemts  Jujfttia  &  Mtfertcordis, 

Vis  <2  iiy.r  tti  ,  quod  aperies  os  meum  ? 

tAfiqttareinqHir  DomiHus  vificarem  Stephanum  humiliet  Semetyrum, 

E.  K  —  Inclinat  caput  fuum]  quia  ecce  habeo  quoddicam.  Si. 
ecce  habeoj^  labia  mihi  confuta  funt. 

iJM^^K'ficat  igitHT  fotenti  Cceli  &  terra  Dettm  CreMorem ,  Regent  &  illuminaterem  qmdpcf- 
Jtt  VjbispeccatoribHs  prop'itiuf  ejfe  &  VHlt'.tm  ejus  miftricordi  am  fuper  vos  converter  e. 

E.  K.  Jam  converfuseft  totus  inClobium  igneum. 

A  Milereie  noHri  DoiTiine,iecundumm3gnairi  mifericordiain  tuam,  &:c. 

E.  K.  Jam  ma"gnus  quidam  fumus  per  plicas  quafdam  (infta  nir- 
bis)  lapidem  operet. 

E.-  K.  Jam  videtur  ilia  nubes  convoluta  efle  ,  &feoriim  ad  u-  A 

1  1       •  1-    r        r*^  Ldiine  hac 

num  latus  lapidis  lepolita.  funtmbatm 

......   Verbnm^  ab  altijfimo  miffus  facioj  ^^''* 

O  uamohrem  crige  te  (^  diliqmter  notaqiadhac 

Attencle  btefbane  y  quiste  aLunabults  reprehoifwm- 

Enntriajit  ?  qnis  z>iarmn  tuarum  labores.  m^abhfui- 

Aut  jfiventatis  tea  temeritntc  me»fiiravit  ?  alf  impetu  judicii  &  temporis  :  qais  te  legit  ?  ^'"^'^  verbiim 
am  Hnde  muMttis  cs  Coelefli  decor e  ?    Hayic  itbi  animam  viventem  ,  [agacem^  &  [ale  plemm^  quis  ?'«'^/'{"""'*** 
induxit?    Noyive  %ex  ille  gloria  ,  in  ciijy.s gratiam  omnisfiibjeBa  efi  ,  in  ccelo  &  in  terra  pote-  ^j^^Juracoviie 
fioi?  qutte  potentieltvans  brachio  a  milite  admajorem  ,  amxjore  .,  ad  maximum  evocavitfep- 
trium  i    iV«?j,vf  ider,t  ille  ,  qui  te  &  vocat  &  vijitat  :  &  de  femetiffn  ,  ame  facula  dixit ,  Ego 
f«m  ?    Q^uareiaitur-,  Nebulam  tam  tenebrofam ,  tantaeccecaliginetamadicotngratudinefufful- 
tam  ,  imer  Benrataum^  &  animam  tuaminduxifii?  An'cjuodKonaccepijlihabes}  []he  fhaked 
his  hand  at  tbeKir.g,  after  the  Polonianmauner]  Jlut  unde{'Dic)  DiademaCapitis?   Ecce  quit* 
*»fra£ili  cordis  tHifrudefJtiaj  Detim  a  fimfiris,immo  a  ttrgo  ^  pofuifii^  fequitur  te  fpiritus  ma- 

lignus 


^o6  (ayf  true  relation  ofDu  Dee  his  Adfions^  mtbJpints.SiLc, 


lignus:  Namerafii:  IgitHrmtiltiflicata&nHmeratafHntpeccatatmiin  CccIts^Judicutift  tunm 
intt  CA»es  ifficum  ffmda  ProphetaferMtin^uinatiifuntRegiavtitfceleretPtrpiJfimo-,  Cubkultt 
tun  olint  mahm  ,  ignar  f:irrexu  'Dens  tHrgidus  &  terribilis  faEltu  eft  &  iratas  tibi.  Verum  fie 
d:citDominus ;  qittapatres  tm  ^  ad  Ahare  mcnn:  fanEiiores  ft-ctereine(]ue  perverfi  a  voce  (^vi* 
mcirecejftre;  t:  ^mem  ^  qnia  virHm  avulgo  diftwclum  feperando  feperavi ,  o-  feperatust;  eli- 
j^endotdtUxi :  NonvifitAbo  tniquitatts  taas  invergnmeA  :  Hicjue  1)ejictam  te  tjiionadntodum 
decrevi:  Sidi>iSo\\oz\x.\.\h2Li\dledeaspermitta9».  l^erum fi hrticbiHm  mettmZelo  cognovfris pe- 
tens:  ft  impktatemtuam  derelinq'tes :  ft  HmuMittiiz  ornaveris^  ft fetidam  afmn  tuo  leprtim^ 
Aluf2ic4tir.eam^  (aon  ddvomitum  rediens)  ^bfter  ftris  Ego  quoque  iram  avertam  mcAm  ,  ^  dies 
ti:*  relinquA  ftabilicntur  fartitndifi{  '.  RegesmalidiEii  &  potentes  hHJits  nudi  tHioxicati  calice^ 
Jl-feretricis  (^mea  qui*  fiegkxere  ftMHtA  ')fiilmine  ire  mei  in  mami ,  &  ante  pedes  tiios  cadem  fer- 
rurique  eritgUditu  tHta  nAiiombm ,  tnteln  te  (^oeli  circumdHcent  dnm  in  rohore  dexter  a  tua  peri- 
bunt  inimici' 

Cor  popnli ;«/,  a  te  alienDttuWy  poft  modicum  repurgabitttr  :  qui  nutem  infantum  confpiramere 
turfiftir))? ,  cadeut  ulcire.  Adhne  ft  latere  mco  cum  ftrmiter ,  tamfideliter  adhafcM  ahumbrabit 
tefpirntis  men:  &  evades  fapietis  '■  teqne  res  Fmcundabtt  de  Ccelo.   Hec  eft  verttas  &  Lex  Domi- 

«  r  •/     "'>  fj''i>»prcp}ft  t'bi^  LwxDd  I.odie  Stephii>}o:   /git({,-ft{metibigladiumfemori,eftrt»ge,elev4 

fr(/'Don:tno&  vsritiite^pugtia^vince,  'S^gn^i  Nolt  {ftcat  hom»^)  timort  cedere-,  nequede  mtindo 
querttate  :  quia  Dens  tads  tecum  eft ;  /^«'-f  terrtbilis  &  magntis  Dominus  exercituitm  :  Jgitttr- 
ft  OS  ttium  '{'.^te  a  folio  aperies  :  ft  impinm  condemniveris  impietatts  iwpleto  te  fptr  im  meo ,  c^  ;?«/- 
mutuArepUniurigntpotehti^  dntitntanHs  tUAVindicam  C  celos  ^  \Jnchnatcafut.~^ 

iihmit  Impiam  illam  getter. tttonem,  (^de  qn.t  Dom  'no  loqimntur  eft^  0-  infervitutem  tibi  tradidity)ctinr 

videris  tcmpHs^  cum  flits fnis^  0"  apoptflojuo  ^  aparvo  ufque  admajore  ^  percute  gladto  hi  pro 

impietaie  veccar i^f;t pljKrxrfim  numsrus  \  teniae  it  ifftiRpis  Bahdrnz  (»on  minns  odiofa   (fa lis  : 

qttam  terr.i, gri'.-jts^  &  wdtofa)  fanata  tibi  eft  ;    &  nmlediEia injubarefolis,  CclLige  &  Orna. 

Ftigepedem  m  A qniii»}e^&  digit ts  tange  mare-,  <^ not,ifper»ere corottam  alttfftmi  ofiendum  tibi 

nomenmeum  ^  Q- ponam  Uudt s     tuas  inter  aquM.    Ctnge  te  etiamftcut  forti-,  ampleSere  monies 

nteridior^Aies  ;   &  ttdifica  mthi  altare  :    Er^ptiim  enim  vmeula  ab  tlht.   Ab  Oceidente ,  manus  vie- 

lefit.ts  in  vifeera  tua  extendttnf-  Sedfcrro  prafcindam  illas  ungues.  Denique  ft  a  peccatis  ceft'averis^ 

ftfsaiofi/igyabiscixleBium,  &  ambuUnd^s  coram  me  Domino  Tyco  tuo  injuftitia.,    &  veritatty 

^        Csr  ndiicqutdinKomtnenfeo  feperit   be»edicatHr&inmefpleHdoremfufciptt;St»aittem,verba.,qH* 

Sgomet  niter       ,  n  i  °      •  » 

txifjiimt  vtdt     locutKS  eft  Dominns  »  aadire  Mttneris  ,  Egomet  ulcer  cxiflam  hodie  exaltavi  te  in  Domino,  (^  poftti 

Jit/tii  14.  caput  tuum  inter  ftellas :  Efto  igitiir  obediens :   Faratfts  eft  terror  tmpits  ,  &  maledtUus  eft  mun~ 

dus  :     Beat  us  autem  q'ti  fdelner  obfervttnt  Verba,  (^  ilia  cuftcdtet  qUit  Dominus  hedie  fecit  ^r4» 

tia  Del  patris,  jefn  Lhrsji/ftlii,  ejus  ^meltnat  capui^  &  Sptritue  Sanclt  vifttetvosfemper  [exteit' 

dit  mantis  ftitu  valdeq 

A    Ainen. 

Add-vic  familiam  tuam  cum  cckritate. 

Anfliit  hot  ^  Sitbcnediiftusnomcn  r.l-.iflfimi  qui  in  fcrrandis  promifHsefl  connanciflimus,  &in  mifericor- 

dixit.  diisabundantisfimus/.  llli  Gloria,  Laus,  Honor,dccus,  jubilatio,&  graciaium  adionane 

&  Icmpcr.    Amen. 


(Ji^aiii^.  J^  '  . 

Ttttfday  mnne  circa  6.  i»    NyepolomsLt. 

A  Orationc  finica  &  aliquicus  verbis  fadis,  dc  nofira  cum  Stephano  Aftione  prxteritahxrl. 

£.   K.  Here  is  he  that  was  yefteiday  in  our  Adion  with  the 

He,  mihi  (faith  the  Lird)  [Hg  ftoopcth  by  Httlc  dowHward]  "^h^  ^^"i^ 

myhanJ  from  the  Earth?  IVhat  have  all  the  Princes  of  the  IVcrld  built  a  lower  againftme} 
Thefe  in  denjfing  me  and  my  Majeftie  :  The  other  rvallorving  in  extream  drunkjtinejfe  amongfttht 
pleafures  and  blmdnefte  of  the  ftefty ,  negleHing  (rvithout  fear)  mj  Commandements  ,  have  I 
thYowKOf'.c  the  (fhildr  eh  from  the  Vine  yard-,  andcalled  in  the  Dung-carriers?  have  Ivifttedmy 
fervams,  {whom  I  ehofef)  in  reratb  and  indignation  with  the  Sword  ofjtiftice  ?  have  I  thm  fcat- 
tered  them  Won  the  face  of  the  World,  without  a  Shepherd  ,  to  entertain  blafphemous  Murderers-, 
Lyars,  and  the  Runnagates  of  the  Earth,  the  feed  of  Cain ,  and  of  the  curfed  \  O  you  Cater  pil- 
lers,  Ojou  that  fill  the  Earth  with  peifan\  Oyou  abufers  of  my  Name,  and  Di(honororsofmj 
Temple  \  F/hat  is  the  caufe  that  you  arefo  barren ,  or  that  the  Lord  hath  not  mightily  ftjewed  him- 
felf  among/}  you,  as  unto  his  Children  ?  PFhy  are  not  the  ^Miracles  and  {Venders  a  Teftimony  of 
the  God  of  Truth  amongft  you,  as  they  -were  unto  the  Jfraelites  ?  Why, hath  not  the  Sea  divided  her 
felf  ?  Why,  hath  net  tbf  Lord  dthvfrtdyou  from  binda^  ?  Vntt  the  Jfraelites  hegavt  a  fruitful 

Lanit 


, ^  '     '    *  !■--      ■  '  ^— —  ■■■  ,.—    .  .  —     -I    ^— ■Ml»-M,|    I         ^  I.,         ,        ,  ,  ,.„,..        ,. 

i^jftrue  i^elatim  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  Anions,  mthjpirits^  &e.  407 


land  (  the  pojfcffion  of  the  wfck^d  )  abottndtfi^^  with  CMtlk^  a^d  Honej  .•  unto  jott ,  he  hath  dettvc 

redrour  foJfcJJioH  unto  the  D^gsTandyoHr  children  to  become  Ca^tives^rvhj  doth  not  thiGodof  Bvfts 

ftretch  forth  his  ha«dfayiK(!^ :  Deliver  my  people  from  bondage?  Are  not  the  times  of  thofe  tatter  dajes  ^ 

a»d  of  the  Harveft  of  the  'Difcifles  *  findorved  amorgt  the  doings  and  graces  of  the  Ifraelites^jou-  Asthe//»«f/l/« 

lire  become  blind  1  jok  have  eyes  but  you  fee  not  ^  for  you  *  kiioA' not  the  time  cf your  vylmuon,    and    HUrufa- 

O  thoff  ftif-necked  Cfeneratior  this  is  the  cafife^  that  the  finger  of  God  commeth  not  amongft  you  :  ^"^  '^"<-"'  "ot 

Thisy  this  is  the  canfe  ,  becatife  you  have  noc  Faich  :  Neither  it  the  Sprit  of  godlmes  and  obedience  li^'pj'""/^,  °\  ^ 

amongft  jou^  can  he  that  tsainnsth  defile  himfclfe  with  lying'.  orcanthefiejhofmaKdiminilhthe   and   fo  arc 

authority  of  the  godhead:  isChxii}  ]cius,(  very  Godof  very  God)  of  lefs  power  or  firengih  unto   thcfe  daycs 

you  ,  then  he  wtu  before  ,'  wdo  the  feed  of  Abraham  :  becaufe  he  hath  taken  your  ftejh  upon  htm.   I^'adowcd  in 

O  you  ignorant-,   9  you  blind  firangers  ^  0  you  that  were  faithful  inthefight  of  the  Lord,   is  not  'hei/"Mc/«« 

the  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth  heire  unto  you  ■,   by  reafon  of  his  Man-hood  have  you  nu  now  ac~  *^'>°^^' 

cefs  your  felvts  unto  the  Throne  of  the  Higheft,  which  your  Fathers  had  not  >  the  Jfraelites  ran  unta 

the  Prophets  and  high  Priefis  :  yea  ,they  dnrfi  not  run  before  the  Lord :  For  it  was  faidofthcm 

*  Let  tbe?»  ftand  before  the  hill.    They  brought  their  offerings  t«  the  Prieft ,  which  offered  up  thetr 

frayers  and  humility  i  But  unto  you  {.0  you  df  little  faith)  the  Gates  are  fet  open:  yea,  even  unto  "^xod.c.ij.bc 

the  Throne  of  God  :  vtl?y  therefore,  doe  you  not  afcend  unto  your  Chnfi  ,    l^ioich  is  anointed  before 

the  Father.  Hath  he  anointed  him  for  himfetfe^or  for  you?  for  both  :  //you  have  no  miracle,  you 

havenobkh  ,  if  you  have  {faith  the  Son  of  God)  faith ,  to  be  compared  with  a  Mu^ard'feed,  SCc, 

But  you  do   none  of  thefe  things ,  neither  is  the  name  of  Cod  magnified  amongft  you ,  Is  it  not  a  ^^'^''nculk 

fhatne ,  that  the  faith  of  man  groweth  not  to  be  equal  with  a  Aduftard-feed ,  is  it  not  a  figne  of  your  ^'^"' 

flavifh  nature  ,  from  thewhich  you  were  cal'ed,<hat  there  is  no  faith  amongft  yati? 

True  it  is:  For  why  the  bloodofchrift  ts  flied  upon  you:  and  you  are  wafhed  without  deferts 
Behold.now  (  faith  the  Lord  )  when  I  have  Ihncd  up  a  Moles  there  are  no  Ifraelites  that  will  follow  .A  ^ofeti      ' 
him  :  the  feed  of  Abraham  is  dcftroyed  with  the  /Winter  of  kit-love  <?«^dif-obedience. 

The  Lord  groaneth,  faying:  fVhether  jhalt  J  turnme  ?  unto  whom  fhalll  fljew  my  face?  if  I  fat 
unto  them  go  out,  jet  your    l  erts  againft  the  wicked  ■  Behold,  1  will  be  amongft  you  ,  andfioht  for 
you :  who  ts  it  that  hearcth  me  ?  where  is  jour  faith  become  ?  who  is  he  that  betieveth  me  ,  O  yoti 
wicked  feneration  (hall  the  Lord  call  you  andfeek,e  your  deliverance ,  and  will  you  know  of  the 
Lord  wi'.h  \vh;t  meane  she  will  werkj^'^ow'^  you,M  the  God  of  Heaven  and  E^rth  become  amonaft  ^'"^  '"^fp''"'"^ 
yotf  an  Ingineer  or  a  Merchant, a  Hoarder  up  of  worldly  treafure ;  or  one  that  rideth  on  horfe-back  to  '"^'''^^  Stephani 
battail  ?  youjtinkjng  Carrion,  you  hatefuj^etches  before  Heaven  and  Earth ,  you  blind  htrehnvs.  ^'^a'  """  ^'*'' 
who  deviled  the  Seas    nhothn'i}  down  jeTicho,  who  overthrew  the  wicked  Kings}' who  dcfiroyed 
the  Citie'  of  the  wicked?  who  fought  againft  the  reprobate  (jianis  andtheflefhofmankind}  who  ^^^ 
opened  the  windowes  of  Heaven  and  confumed  jou  all  except  as  you  read  '  eight  perfons     yea  if  * 
out  of  the  wind'iwes  I  can  confume  you  ,  what  (hall  become  of  you  if  I  open  my  doors,  if  I  fend  out     Gsnef./.  8,' 
tKy  fervants  agu-nlh  you,  and  my  innumerable  army.  Is  it  notfaid,  whatfoever  I  put  into  your     fy» 

mouthes  ,  thai  fpeake.    H'hy  do  you  fo^  but  for  the  truths  fake:  If  therefore  I  bid  you  doe,is  not  my   ^ 
■  truth  all  one  ?  /  am  full  of  forrow :  for  no  man  openeth  his  doors  unto  me  ,  no  man  believcth  me  • 
no  man  rtmembreih  that  t  made  Heaven  and  Sartk : 

Stay  a  while  that  I  may  weep  with  my  felf. 

£.  it.  All  the  ftone  is  become  black  and 
full  of  fiery  fpecks. 

A  After  we  had  read  the  premiffes 

£.  iC.Here  is  another  now  come  in  green  a  man  with  nothing  "'■"^fe-  J^rf< 
on  his  head  but  onely  his  yellow  hair.  "'■^'^''* 

He  haih  iiive  a  pair  of  black  boots  under  his  garments  clofe  to 

his  legs  :   llKe  buskins  Sec.  ^  Note  Ilemefe  appeared  in  July, 

Anno  1 548,  and  did  make  an  end  of 
^  Nalvage  his  work,  &c. 

Iteach  you  [  he  paufed  afccr  a  pretty  while        •  ,  ^=  appeareth  their   like  a  little  ' 

child  with  yellow  hair,  &c, 

Thuf  faith  the  Lord  thou  muft  <«;j/n?«r  Steven  according  tothe  hardnefs  ofhishart :  Anfwer  Refponfuifpu- 
A/»»f/;?«,  tor  thi  Mean.'  Lo,  Kivg^the  God  of  Heaven  and  Sarth  hath  placed  me  before  thee,  and  *""  Stephana 
hath  fhewed  Ui-ito  ihee  his  will  ,  hath  nouri(hed  up  me  his  fervant  from  my  youth  unto  this  day  ,  in     ^^'' 
thefear  of  hmi  O'ldthe  fervent  dehre  of  true  wiidome  ,  whereby  I  have  attained  {through  his  help) 
unto  the  k'^ov  ledge  andfecrets  of  the  things  in  Nature :  which  knowledge  behold  in  the  nameof  God 
and  for  hisfiks  •    and  bec.iufe  he  hath  chofett  thee ,  lo,  lofer  up  unto  thee  ,  and  willingly  made  thee 
partaker  of^rbis  do. e  be  not  afraid  to  open  thy  -mouth  unto  him  ,  as  thoU  didft  «»f(»  Rodolph>  in   v  Jolf  the 
Writing ,  B:bold  (  0  King)  lean  make  the  Philofophers  Stone ,  forfo  they  caEit ,  Bear  thou  there-  Empetoard     \ 
fore  the  charge,  and  give  me  a  name  within  thy  Court  that  I  may  have  aecefs  unto  thee'  andyearlf 
maintenance  of  thee  ioi\xsho\h  i  .Command  htm  alfojorjtrike  4  band  effecrecy  betrris»  him  i  thf 

felfe, 


T  -  -       -  .    —      ..     ■  ., 

^oS^^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  fcw  J&ms^mtbprits,SLc. 

■  felfejandLisky,    Take  heed,  thou  want  not  taith  :  for  I  will  help  thee  :  A>ui  hefljall  have  a  grca*: 

For  us  both      Jreaflire     /  rvtH  fee  them  ,  if  he  will  labour  for  me.  But  it  may  ie  Lasky  vpill  holdhtm  by  the 
£.iC.an<iA     kcele. 
Fides.  ^  What  mean  you  by  that  phrafe  ? 

♦♦».♦  As  jAC9bdidEfau, 
G:nef,23.D  Vntothis  appl^  *hy  felf^  And  give  thywhole  endei\ox  from  ti??Je,  to  time  alfo  I  rvilloptM  my 

mind  unco  Stephen  through  chee,or  in  the  prefence  of  himfelr. 

But  let  Lasky  open  this  unto  him  :  The  Camp  is  kjiorrn  >*nto  me, 

A I  underltand  not  this  point- 

,.., .  Let  him  underfiand,  than  art  minded  fo  to  doc, 
Stfttmd'icbus         For  this  fevend.t/es  ■,3.skz  no  more  zn\\NZi-. 
cijfandum  a  £s  How,and  ifthe  King  be  delirous  ofany  aftion  ? 

refponfispe-  ^^^^^  j'refpea  m  the  KiKg. 

*       *  A  I  bcfeech  you  be  not  offended  that  I  ^ske  your  name  ? 

„.,,  ihmefe.  £.  J^,  Hc  IS  gone. 

A  The  other  will  come  again. 
.  A  voice.  Non  venit.  |» 

Therefore  fliut  up  the  window. 

DeusCoeli  8c  TerixdanobisFidem. 


I   ■.. 


/  -j-     Nyepolonic&e  in  Aula  Regis  St. 

S  Tuefday  a  meridie  circa  horam  tertiam  :  The  King  fend  for  me  to  hear  what  I  hsd  to  fay  to  him 

as  lhad,lend  him  word  that  Ihad  tgfay  lomcwhat  tohimin  Godhisbehalfe.When  I  wascome 
into  his  privy  Chamber,  and  all  others  excluded  but  ontly  the  Lord  Lasky  who  came  with  me  ,  and 
fiayed  by  the  King  his  commandemeiu.  I  faid  thus  verbatim  as  foUoweth. 

A  Ecce  (  6  Rex  )  Deus  Coeli  &  terrs  ,  me  ante  oculos  Veftros  pofuit :  &  vobis  fuam  declaravit 
valuncatcm:  me  autem  fcrvum  fuuma  juventute  mca  ad  praefentemdiemenutrivit  intimore  illius, 
&  defiderio  ferventi  verae  fapientiae  qua  ratione(&  ejus  auxilio)aflecutus  fum  cognitioncmSc  fccreta 

rerumnaturalium  qil&mcognitione  (  ecce  )  in  nomine  Dei. 

^___^^.^_^_«_^— — ^__^.^__^^^^— ^— —  .^____— .— _^ — -      -^ —  » 

Janii  6  '\'   ^racot 

Mane  horam  circiter  S  .*. 

Orationibus  finitis ,  pro  luce  &  veritateDivina,  quae  nos  ducerent  &  perducerent  ad  montem 
fandum5'/'»«.  &c, 

I  have  (6  Lord)  according  to  my  fimple  abilitie ,  endeavoured  my  felfto  declare  to  .S«?/«» 
thofe  chinos  I  was  willed  ;  accept,  6  Lord,  my  intent,  and  give  me  thy  graces  and  encreafe  my 
faich  that  I  may  in  my  doings  and  layings,  plcafe  thee  or  not  offend  thy  divine  Majeftie ,  and  now 
6  Lord,  T^e  await  thy  further  direction:  not  prefuming  to  propound  (  as  now)  matter,  fuch  as  our 
frail  ftate  might  move  us  unto  :  but  therein  we  grave  this  aide  ,  chy  light  and  wifcdome,  Sic. 

K.E.  Here  is  a  great  head  with  wings  like  a  Cherubim  :  all  of 
fire,  the  eyes  are  very  big,  as  big  as  your  bat ,  and  his  head  as  big  as 
thisTable* 

„.,»  He  that  is  a  Jleep  let  him  flee p  on  .^  he  that  is  in  the  high  way  let  him  fiot  ret  urn  home. 
He  that  eatech  let  him  not  rife ,  but  eatftill ,  and  he  that  weepeth  let  him  weepftill ,  he  that  re- 
joyeeth  let  him  re  Joyce  for  ever.  He  that  goeth  arvry  let  him  not  return  into  the  way.  He  that 
planteth  his  Vineyard  let  him  not  fee  itj  he  thatgathereth  the  grapes  let  him  xot  drin^efthem  ,  be 
that  blafphemeth  the  name  of  God ,  let  him  blafpheme ,  for  he  retumeth  not.  But  he  that  looketh  up 
Unto  Heaven,  let  him  xot  cafl  his  eyes  upon  the  Earth. 

Behold^the  Lord  hath  forgotten  the  Earth,  and  it  is  a  burden  to  me  that  I  am  here ,  therefore  I  go. 

Z^nto  thofe  that  do  well  ■)  the  Stetvard  is  ready  with  the  rtwardy  wo  be  unto  the  Monfier  of  t  he 
Earth,for  he  is  accurfed. 

E.  K.  He  is  gone;  2ind  fly  eth  in  a  flrange  order  :  upward  in  a 
fpecial  line  in  manner  ? 

A  voice.  Put  all  things  to  filence  that  the  Lord  had  touchedy 

Therecentacle  ani  tiie  Biol^s^fee  youopenthemnot.,  nor  touch  them  until  you  hear  more  from 
me.   But  h  f '  rio^kt  heart,  and  walke  the  ways  that  you  are  returned  into,  i 
Take  this  one  lejfon:  you  are  in  favour  with  me,  and  for  the  reft  care  not. 
^  Thy  mercies  be  fealed  upon  us  for  ever  and  ever,  6  Lord,  of  Holts. 

£.  it .  Now  is  a  red  thing,  like  a  Cloud  come  all  over  the  ftone. 

Ignem  cuiamoris  &  pra:potencis  f\dei  in  cordibus  noftris,  accendc,  6  Deus 
Omnipocens  nunc  8£  fempcr.     %Amen. 

Anna 


(^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AUions, with ffir  its  yB>Lc,     409 


Unica  Adio,-  qiice  Fmuma  vocetur. 
Que  durabatabhom y.  mane,  ad  horam  1 1 

?  K  A  g  M. 


Adiio  PiHcciana. 


prior  pars. 


-|-    Pragx. 
Angtifli    6. 
7  uefddjf    Mane,  circa  onnm  St  lis  ,  &  nobis hsii  injungebarur. 

Fufis  de  macre  prarcibus,  &c.  piilcmfcus  nobis  A  ,  E.  K.!k  Fr.  Ptteei,  ut  prilcriptum  erat. 
Dilpolica  crac  Menla  foedcus :  Canddaquc  cerea  accenla. 

E.  K.  Here  is  one  ,  covered  in  white  to  the  breft ,  all  white  ap- 
paralled,he  hath  a  long  glafie  in  his  left  hand ,  full  of  filthy  loath- 
iome  ftuffe,  like  matter  or  hke  bloud  and  milk,  or  curds  mingled 
together  ,  and  a  ftafte  about  an  ell  long  in  his  right  hand  ,  he  fet- 
teth  the  end  on  the  ground ,  he  pointeth  with  his  ftaffe  toward  the 
*  Table  of  Covenant.  atu^tp 

Accede  JJominum.  j^  aj  jh^  uC^,. 

_  .  al  Table,  ia 

A  He  Lf.  A.  J  cams  to  the  Table  ot  Covenant »  and  looked  intotbe  Hff//-/?^^,  our  fccrcc  ftn- 
and  law  cbi-  Idme  vifion,  but  his  face  is  (heic)  bare,  and  he  feemedi  to  be  ZJrisl,  dy,»nU  bad  fst 

my  ufujl 
A   Benedidliisquivcni:  in  nomine  Domini :  obcatiDei  Lux,  shew-fti^ne 

URIEL.   ......  GioriAtt{;i1>jmi>i(,   'Rjx  coeli,  &  terra^  qtti  es,  &  ventftrus  es.  before  hmi. 

E.   K.  Now  I  fee  the  foundation  of  an  old  thing  ,  as  though  it 
wiere  of  a  Church. 

A  voice  ......  Meafare. 

A/cdfttre  from  the  Eafi  to  the  North  ,  and  from  the  Morth  to  the  fVcJl  part ,  for  hshoU  ,  the  reji 
is  judged  already. 

U  R  I  H  L  ,.„♦.   IhAvemcaftired^  (L.,rd)z<^yai>dthehalfoftn>e»tj/fivt. 

37  1- 

The  voice  .,...,    Divid:  tfto  three  parts.       [A  The  third  part  of  37 1] 

URIEL  »   It  IS  done.  is  ii~. 

Th:  voice  ,,,,,»   Vnto  the  Kings  of  the  Eafl  give  the  fir Ji. 

K»to  the  Kings  of  l^'eft  give  the  fecond. 

The  remnant  meafure  nnttthe  dayes  of  the  North  :  that  the  fire  of  my  indignation  ,  may  be  a 
tridle  amongfi  them^  and  that  the  whole  hVorld  {except  the  excepted)  may  dri»kj>f  the  f arrow  of  the  T/opfccfirf.' 
[eve/ith  part  of  the  half  time,  yet  to  come. 

URIEL  „»,.♦  Thy  mofith  (O  Lord)is  4  two-edged  frpordf  thy  judgments  are  perpetual  and 
tverUfhing^  thy  words  arethsfpirit  of  truth  and  under  ft  anding^thy  Garments  moft  pure  and  fmel- 
Uttg  incenfc ;    Thy  S:*t  withiut  end  ,    a>7d  triumphing ,  vfho  is  hkj  unt»  thee  amongfi  the  tie  a- 

H  h  mini. 


4 1  o     (oy^  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  ks  ABtons,mthfprhs,^c, 


AVifion. 


Libet  cum  7  fi- 
giUis. 

Emet  tail. 

The  argcl 
with  the  Beok, 


ly^'fiutio 

ju'Tiiia, 

C^ltjrricordiie. 

Judte^rum. 

Convcifio. 


Virhits  prtva- 
lehati 


'vens,  or  who  hath  known  thj  beamy  ?  Great  art  thoH  tn  thy  holy  ones  ,  and  mighty  in  thy  rverd  a- 
tnoKgft  the  SoKnes  of  men :  Thy  Tefiamem  is  holy,  and  itndefiled,  Theglorj  of  thy  Seat ,  and  the 
health  of  thy  Sonnes  :  Thy  anointed  is  [acrificed^  and  hath  brottght  health  unto  the  faithfnl  ^  and 
utito  the  Sonnes  of  Abraham.  Thyfpirit  is  cverlafitng.^and  the  oil  of  comfort  ■■  The  Heavens  {there- 
fore') gather  themfelves  together-^  with  Hallelnjah  to  hear  witnefe  of  thy  great  indignation  and  fu- 
ry prepared  for  the  Earthy  which  hath  nfen  up  with  the  Kings  of  the  Earth ,  and  hath  put  on  the 
Wedding  garments  :  frying  rvith  her  f elf  I  am  a  Queen  :  I  am  the  daughter  of  felicity.  Remem- 
ber ally  e^  that  are  drunken  with  my  pleafure,t  he  CharaBer  I  have  given  you  ,  and  prepare  your 
felvcs  to  contend  with  the  Higheji  ,  fet  your  [elves  againfl  him  ,  as  againfi  the  anointed ,  for  you 
are  become  the  Children  of  a  firong  (fhampioK  :  who fe  Sonne  {hall  garntfh  you  with  the  Name  of  a 
Ktngdome,  and  fhall  poure  wonders  amo"gfi  you  ^  from  the  fiar res  ■,  which  fhall  put  the  Sunne  the 
fieward  of  his  Waggon^and  the  Moon  the  handmaid  of  hitfervants.Bttt-^O  God,p?e  is  a  Lyar^  and  the 
fire-brandof  dejlruciion,  For,bcholdithou  art  mighty^  andfhalt  triumph^andfhalt  be  a  Conqner^ 
for  ever, 

E.  K.   NoTV  the  Stone  is  full  of  white  fmoak. 

A  A  Paufc. 

£.  K.  The  fmoak  is  gone,  and  here  ftandeth  one  over  him  in  the 
aire  with  a  Book,whofe  nether  parts  are  in  a  cloud  of  tire ,  with  his 
hair  fparfed,  his  arms  naked  ,  the  Book  is  in  his  right  hand  ,  a  four 
fquare  Book,  with  a  red  fiery  cover,  and  the  leaves  be  white  on  the 
edge,  it  hath  7  fealesupon  it ,  as  if  the  clafpes  were  fealed  with  7 
golden  Seales.  And  there  are  letters  upon  the  Scales,  the  fiift  E.M. 

£.  r.  r.  A.v. 

♦♦w.»    T^'^ks  this  Booky  ut  Veritas  Luce  magis  clarefcatfEt  Li-x,  verttate  fiat  valida.     Data 
ejl  enim  tibi pottfiaSy  dandi  & aperiendi  hiinc  h  rum  mundo  &  mundis. 
URIi^L, ^^^filoria  tibiiRex  cwli (^terr&  tjxi  fMtfti.es,&  venturus^s  hinc  f»/>w,judiciu  meretricis, 

E.  K.  Now  'Vriel  taketh  the  Book,  kneeling'upon  bothhis  knees. 

URIEL  ,.,,.,  Rejoyce  O  you  fonnes  ef  mm  ,  lift  up  your  hearts  unto  heaven  for  the  fecrets  of 
God  are  opened  .  and  his  word  letoutof'JPrtfon.  Rejoyce^OyoufonnesofGod^  for  the  fpirit  of  truth 
and  underflanding  is  amoKgTt  you.  Re.ojce  O  yo/t  that  art  of  the  SanBuary  ,  for  you  fhall  be  full  of 
wifiom  and  andrr/laiding.  Rijoyce  O  thou  tie  Houlc  ©f  Jacob,  tor  thy  vilnation  is  at  an  end,  and 
thy  vtfitationis  begtnning'.The  four  winds  fhall  gather  thee  together^and  thoufljatt  build  up  the  trod- 
den wall :  he  bridenroom  fh^ll  dwell  with  thee.  And  /o,  behold,  the  Lord  hath  f  worn,  and  wit  kei- 
nej[e(loall  >int  emcr  into  thee.,  »eu  her  (hall  the  Spirit  of  the  Higbeft  go  from  thee,  but  thy  fathers 
bones  (hall  have  refi  ;  And  ti?ou  (k-'.lf  Itve  eternally. 

The  bloud  of  the  Innocents  fhall  be  wa(hed  away  from  thee, and  thou  (halt  do  penance  f»r  many 
dayes,Then  fhall  the  Lamb  Ji  and  in  the  midde(f  of  thy  greets  O  Hierufalemutnd  fhallgivt  Statutes 
unto  thy  people  ar,d  inhabitants  :  All  Nations  (hall  come  unto  the  Houfe  of  David  :  The  t^Jiiothers 
fhall  teach  their  infants,  faying.  Truth  hath  prevailed,  and  the  Name  of  the  Lord  (kail  be  the 
Watch-man  of  thee,  O  City. 

E.  K.  Now  all  is  full  of  a  white  cloud. 

URIEL    ,,...»   Silence  unto  mc^and  refi  unto  yo  If  for  a  feafon. 

E.  K.  All  is  difappeared,  and  the  fbone  feemeth  cleer. 


Ad:ionis  VucciaM 


pofterior  pars. 


A  Legipr3Em!flaLatineipriF^-.T;/m,  &pauca  lociitusiumderegibus&aliisqui  hxc  putanc 
efle  noflras  impoQuras,  &  a  nobis  haec  malaratione  tra£lari,&c, 

E.  K.  He  is  here  again. 

E.  K.  He  litteth  in  a  chair  of  Chriftal,  with  his  Book  in  his  lap, 
and  the  meafitrifig  rod  in  his  right  handjand  the  glaffe  vial  in  his  left 
hand. 

URIEL  ,.,,,,  Seeing  that  power  is  given  untf  me  ,  andtlmt  iruthis  added  untevty  Mi- 
iiiftery  ,  and  I  am  becom:  full  of  light  and  truth^  I  will  open  your  eyes ,  and  I  will  fpeak,  unto  you 
thetruththatyoumayfl^n't^eof  the  lumpi(hnefeof  your  darhneffe  ^  and  profound  ignorance :  a^d 
Tpalkjn  truth  with  your  fathers. 

Give  ear  (^therefore)  diligently  unto  my  voice  :  and  imbibe  my  fayings ,  within  the  liquor  of  your 
harts  ,   that  the  fap  of  your  fttfdfrfiandino  may  receive  firength  ,    and  that  you  mayfionrifh 

with 


^j/ftrue 9^eUtwn ofDr,  Dee bisABions^ mth^iriiSy &c.    411 

'with  /tcctVta()le  Trxth^  As  the  chofen  fervants  and  Mi»iffers  of  the  Hif^befl. 

Touts  tnundfifinmdigno  pofittaefl^  and  is  become  the  open  fliopof  Sasan,  todc-  Maihia, 
ccive  the  Merchants  of  thcE^rth  wich  all  abhcmifiation.  But  \vh«j  arc  you  the  Ped-  ""''''''"'■'' 
Icrsof  fuch  wares  •:  or  the  Carriers  abroad  ot  lies  and  faIfedo(5irine.    Do  you  think  rZ^M. 
itisafmallmattcr  toticihcfenfcof  Gods  Scriptures  and  myfterics  unco  the  fenfc 
and  faatching  of  your  Imaginations  i  Do  you  count  it  nothing  to  (it  in  judgment  a- 
gainft  tbeSpiritot  God:  leaving  him  no  plucc,  butatyour  limitation.  Isitlawfu! 
before  the  Sonne  of  God ,  to  fpcnd  the  whoie  daycs,  yea,  many  yearcs ,  with  the 
Sonncsof  Satan  ,  the  lying  iraps,and  deceivers  of  che  World  :f  Are  you  fo  farcntied 
into  the  lliop  of  abhominacion ,  thac  you  point  unco  the  Same  ef  God  the  time  of  his 
comming,  thcdefcending  of  his  Prophets,  and  the  time  wherein  he  fliall  vifit  the 
Earth  i    Mefes  durft  not  lpcak,but  iioin  the  Lords  mouth :  The  Prophcis  expoun- 
ded not  the  Law  ,  but  the  voice  of  the  Lord.   The  Sonne  of  God  fpake  not  his  own 
words,  in  that  he  was  flcdi ,  but  the  words  of  his  Father  -,  His  Diiciplcs  taught  nor, 
but throughthe holy  Ghoft-,  Dareyou  (therefore)  prefumc  cotcach,  and  open  the 
fccrct  Chamber  of  thcHighcff,  being  not  called^ 

TcUmc,  have  you  left  your  Merchandize*,  and  the  counting  of  your  mony  deceit- 
fully gotten  ,  to  bcome Teachers  of  the  Word  of  God  i  Arc  you  not  afhamcd  to 
teach  before  you  undcr{tandCyca,;irc  you  not  afliamcd  to  lead  away^wherc  you  cannoc 
bring  home  1  Hypocrites  you  arc,  and  void  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,lyars  you  arc  become, 
and  the  enemies  of  Chrift,  and  his  holy  Spirit. 

Pcraovencureyou  will  fay,  i.i  reading  the  Sciipciircs  wcunderfland  Buttcllme, 
by  what  fpiric  you  undcrftand  them  :  what  Ai^l  hath  appeared  unto  you  1  or  of 
which  of  the  Heavens  have  you  been  inftruded  r 

Iimay  bcyou  will  fay  of  the  Holy  Ghofl,0  thou  fool,and  of  little  undcrftanding! 
Doll:  thou  not  underhand  that  the  Holy  Ghort,  is  the  School-mafler  of  the  Churchj 
of  the  whole  Flock  &  Congregation  of  Chnft;?  If  hebctheSchool-maftcrCthercforc) 
over  a  multitude,  it  follovveca  then,  that  one  dodlrine  taught  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  is  a 
IcflcB  or  an  undcrffanding  of  a  multitudc.-But  what  multitude  arc  of  thine  undcrftand- 
ing or  of  what  Congregation  art  tkou  ?  Wilt  thou  fay, thou  art  fcatteted.  Thou  fpeak- 
eft  fafly,thou  art  a  runnagatc.But,  behold,!  teach  thee,and  thy  error  is  bcforcthy  face, 

Whofoeverdoth  undcrftand  the  Script  uresmuft  feck  to  underftard  them  by  Ordi- 
nance and  fpiritual  tradition.  But  of  what  fpiritual  tr;^dition  underftandcft  thou:"  or  by 
what  Ordinsncc  are  the  Scriptures  opened  unto  thee  i  Tfiouwiltfay  thouartinfot- 
med  by  the  Holy  Fathers ,  and  by  the  fame  Spirit  that  they  taught,  by  the  f  ime  Spirit 
thou  underftandcft.  Thou  fay  eft  f  o,but  thou  doft  not  fo.  Which  of  thy  Fore-fathers 
i)Ath  tiedreafon  to  the.  Word  of  God  i  or  the  undcrftanding  of  the  Scriptures  to  the  Dif- 
ciplinc  of  the  Hcathe; -r  1,  fay  unto  thee,  that  thy  Fore-fathers  were  dear  unto  Chrift, 
were  pcrtakcrs  of  the  heavenly  vifions  and  ccleftial  comforts,  which  vifions  and  cde- 
ftial  comfoits,  did  not  teach  unto  them,  a  new  cxpofition  of  the  Scriptures ,  but  did 
confirm  and  give  Iigtit  unto  the  myfterics  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  fpokcn  by  the  Apoftles, 
the  ground-layers  and  founders  of  the  Church.  Whatfocvcr,  thcrcforc,thou  Icarneft 
of  thy  Fore-fathers,thou  Icarneft  of  the  Apoftlcs,and  whatfocvcr  thou  Icarneft  of  the 
Apoftlcs  thou  haft  by  the  Holy  Ghoft.But  if  thou  expound  the  Fathers  after  rhy  fenfc,  . 
&  not  after  the  fenfc  of  the  Apoftles,thou  haft  not  the  Holy  Ghoftjbut  thcfpirit  of  ly- 
ing. Therefore  humble  thy  fclf  and  tall  down  before  the  Lord.  Lay  rcafon  afidc,  and  Reafon, 
cleave  unco  him. Seek  to  undcrftand  his  word  according  to  his  holy  Spirit.  Which  ho-  £«;e/i4 ^^W- 
ly  Spirit  thou  muft  needs  find,  and  fliak  find  in  4  vifibU  Chnrchy_even  unit  the  end.  '^' 

I  will  plainly  fay  unto  thee  (ThatjTruth  may  appear  mightily  in  light:)  Whofoever 
iscontrary  unto  the  will  of  God,  which  is  delivered  unto  his  Church,taBghtby  his  A- 
poftlcSjHOurillied  by  the  Holy  Gholt,dciivcred  unto  the  WotId,andby  Peter  brought 
10  Rome,  hyhxm,  theie  caught  by  his  SucccfTors,  held,  and  maintained,  is  contrary  to 
God  and  to  his  Truth.  ^"'^{^•^ 

Luther  hath  his  reward.  Wilful°lv 

Ca.\\in  his  reward.  GbftiniteJv 

The  refi^  all  that  have  erred,  and  vnilfully  runm  afiray ,  feparating  themfelves  from  the  Church  erring. 

And  Congregationof  Chrtji  oh[\'mzx.t\s'-,  andthrough  the  infiigatioM  of  their  father  the  Devil^have  ^^^  dcfir.u!^ 

their  reward^  Agniriji  jfhfm  the  SoHnt  of  Gtd^aUfronoHHeejudgmemf  faying^      .    •  onof  anH^- 

H  h  3  Gi  ^^^^'^^'' 


412-   (^  true  relation  ofT)r.  Dee  bis  ABions^  with  jj^irtts  fii.c. 


Go  yea  deceivers  into  Hell  fire  y  provided  for  joHr  father  and  his  Children  from  the 

he<^inmng, 

_    p  Tgttrifeup  among'flfffour  felves  ^  f.ipng^TheTop:  is  tXfttichrifl  ;  Tor  by  this  n  ante  yon  call 

no:\n°nduift.  ^"^  J  3ii  evil  mm  he  may  be,  and  fall  trom  his  vocation :  But  he  can  never  be  Antichrifl :  For  An- 

Antichrift.        tichrifi  is  he,  thtfonne  of  the  Devil-,  a  ma>3,fle(h  and  bloud,  born  of  a  rvicksdand  deceitful  H.:r- 

lot,  that  [hall  fedace  thi  peonle  1  fvnell  rvUh  the  fir  ength  of  his  father ,  andreflftGod  in  Earth  a- 

fvongf}  men  ^  as  kis  father  did  in  Heaven  among  the  Angels  ^  titter ly  denying  bis  Omnipotencyj 

Ardfettiag  himfelf  againfl  him, 

CUvcs  Cteli  A'       OjoHfools,  and  of  little  tindirJlA»di»g:   fVhen  unto  the  Apofl/es ,  the  Keyes  of  Heaven  were 

fojlolu  data,   given  ,   that  is  tofaji  the  fame  authority  and  power  ot  Chrilt  Jefus  the  Sonne  of  the  Living  God, 

to  forgive  Jinxes,  sud  to  exclude  fmners  from  the  Ktngdome  of  Heaven  ;   (And)  when  unto  the  fame 

Apoflles'ytc  Tvasfaid  alfo  Come  behind  me  Satan  :  yoit  have  not  ftndsrflandtng  to  fee  into  the  myfle- 

ries  of  the  Highefi;  if  the  Sonne  of  God  did  commend  and  rsfrehend  his  Difciples,  why  May  no$ 

Rcmemberti    (thtrcfort)  a  Bifhop  ^  be  counted  good  and  evil;  if  it  fulLw  {thereforeyhat-good  ,tnd  evilmay  be  a 

aske  amending  Bijh^pJt  \olloweth  alfo ,  that  neither  gond  nor  evil  addeth  n»to  the  A»th«rity  of  a  "Bilhop  ,  bt(t  ti?itt 

of  this  place,    hij  orvn  life;  if  he  be  good  he  reapeth  the  benefit  of  his  goodnejfe  ,  but  if  h;  be  evil  ^  hcisaLyar, 

jf»ne  bejong.     l>eca»fehis'T)oilrineisagaixft  hirnfeify  //f /jer<'/arf  fov  the  (innc  of  man,  God  hath  piffered  many 

»  Afts  »?    A   '"fhefpirit  of  '  Ananias/o  (it  in  the  holy  place^it  is  joryoar  finnes  fnke-andfory  cur  rebellions  nature 

"  to  be  punifhed :    And  not  for  the  oblcu^ing  or  dar kning  of  his Chn;  ch. 

Open  your  eyes  therefore,  andundcrfland ,  and  cleave  to  the  Church  for  the  (^hurchfah^ ,  and 
no:  for  the  love  of  m.in-  D(fi>ife  not  the  Cixirch,  becanfe  of  the  trarifgreffions  of  man  :  But  fub- 
mit  your  neck^tinder  that  holy  yoke  and  ordinance  ,  which  [hall  lead  you  to  the  Congregation  gover- 
ned by  the  Spirit  of  God,  wherein  you  fliall  under  fr  and  the  ftcrets  of  (jod-  his  Book^,  to  be  inter- 
u  Hi  fi'iati-  pYetcdaccordmcr  tothefenfeof  your  fathers  :  whofe  u»derflandin(r  was  the  finder  of  the  Holy  Ghofl-, 
mete  pole[l.  you  cannn  authortii.-  your  jelves ,  a»dwHhout  authority  you  can  do  notntr.g;  1  herejore  tf  your 
authority  be  not ,  i;  by  t4ke  you  upon  you  ttgk  doings  of  the  ([h'.'.ych  ,  which  it  is  e»e  thing  to  fcek^  to 
underj^and  the  Scriptures ,  and  an  oth:r  thing  to  teach  the  Scriptures  according  to  his  undcrftand' 
ing ,  for  he  that  teacheth,  teachcth,  by  Authority  ,   but  if  he  have  no   Authority ,  he  is  an 

'"P^'''  (J}^  brethren  remember  your  felves ,  and  confider  you  are  Children :  you  are  not ,  veflri  juris, 

^.vfaheni.  Ihsrefore^donothingthatisofyourfelves:  But  follow  (as  good  children)  thejlepsof 
^"■'^f'^'^J^''^  your  Mother  :  which  Mother  is  a  pure  Virgin  ,  andisalwayes  tnflruVred  with  the  wifdom of  the 
mm  y'lnie  '  Comforter  J  fVhat  meat  fhe  fiall  givr  unto  you  her  Children  :  and  how  (he  [hall  bring  you  up  and  in- 
Slmplicuas,  flruil you '.  Simplicity  r^  mnch  worth,  and  obedience  is  a  Garla-nd  before  the  Lord.  But  Citriofity 
Obediemia.  is  the  Devil ;  Have  you  not  read  ;  That  the  breadof  the  holy  ones  is  not  to  be  cafi  unto  'Dogs  ? 
Curioficas  a.  Lookjinto  your  felves  whether  you  be  7)^7  s  or  no.  See  if  your  life  be  holy :  your  doings  (Iraight  and 
Diaboloell.  j.^j^  ^  jour  patience  manifold:  your  0iU:ton  great  for  the  Lord  i  if  you  find  not  your  felves  fo  ,  you 
p"l  'J^^l^[  are  not  Children  ;  If  yon  be  not  Children  ,  you  ar:  not  Sonnes  ,  if  you  be  not  Sonnes  yon  have  no 
Cams.  Mother  ,  tfyou  have  m  Mother  you  are  Dogs,-  you  are  devourers  of  the  breadof  Children,  currifhi 

In  miin  \udi-  fenfelejfe^  and  againfi  God. 

cium  (iatiu'.ffi       Entir  therefore  into  jud^rt/ent  with  your  felves, 
(U[ce»damus.  ^anfidcr  you  are  created  by  God. 

Filint,  Confider  you  are  redeemed  by  God. 

Spintiu  Sunn.       Confider  alfo  you  are  alfo  left  to  the  fpiritual  tuition  4nd  comfort  of  God :  which  God  hath  made 
Ecclffa.  of  you  a  Congregation :  a  holy  and  fantt  ifiedfellowfhip  ,  feeding  alwayes  >ts  brethren  together, under 

Thebrcidof    htswtngs.^  and  at  his  '  abU  :  which  feedcth  you  with  the  bread  of  life  and  under fianding,  with 

Rxi)lh"'       '^'  ^'"^^' ^""^ ^^""-^ °f  ^'-^"^  ^'^^'-^  '^'  ^'"""  °f^^^  Living  God. 

°'  l^tth  underflandirgthat  y)u  mayknow  the  will  of  your  Father  which  is  in  Heaven^  andh^iaw- 

tng  hint,  be  obedient  ■■   which  is  the  (.oncliifiou  of  your  vocation.    Shake  not  off"  therefore  the  yokj  of 

eb:dtenii.trjl    Obedience,  Icafi  you  piH  Away  alfo  the  Cup  of  underftandin* ,  andfo  know  ntt  the  will  of  your 

f'''i"">f'""">- Father. 

But  my  thinksth^joa  are  fiarved ,  your  guts  are  fhrunkap  :  your  bones  andfinewes  are  withered. 

yyhat  is  the  canfc  thereof  ?  H^hen  received  you  the  bread  of  the  Lcrd  ?    fvheit  received  you  nourijh- 

mtnt  ?  Q  yoH  of  little  faith  :    and  le[fe  underfianding  you  erre,  and  runne  aflray :  you  are  blind,yom 

follow  not  the  will  of  your  Father :    %eturn,  Tijturn,  and  fay  wit  hin  yourfelves  , 

Q.mopiBniteH-       O  eternal  God  and  loving  Father ,  great  is  thy  care  and  mercy 
'euu/jmquc"* over  us ,   which  being  ledaiTray  (with Satan  and  the  fpirit  of  dark- 
nLnf^f'^  ncfle)  haft  brought  US  home:  which  being  blind  haftfet  open  be- 
fore our  eyes :  (our  eyes  alfo  opened)  the  true  path  and  line  of  un- . 
derftanding :  Happy  are  we  whom  thou  loveft  fo  deerly  :  and  unto 
whom  the  care  of  our  health  is  fo  dear :  We  will  therefore  praife 

thy 


(0^  true  relation  of  Dr,  Dec  his  ABions, with ffir  its,  &c.     4 13  V^ 

— ■    '        ~" — ,  — I.*-— — _ , *■-.-   - 1  — » 

thy  Name,  and  return  from  our  errors  :  vvc  will  acknowledg  our 
finnes  ,  and  follow  thy  Commandements  :  for  thou,  O  Lord,  art 
onely  juft  and  true ,  and  thy  mercy  is  everlafting  :  Thy  Lawes  are 
fweet,  and  thy  love  and  kindneffe  mighty  amongft  us,  Holy,  Holy, 
Holy  Lord  God  of  Zcbaoth  y  all  honour  praifeand  glory  be  nnto 
thee  for  ever. 

A  Allien. 
,,;,,»  Jftcr/trvhile  Tremrfi  a^niK. 

£.   K.  He  is  gone. 

^  Nocc,  I  read  the  premiflcs  to  Tr-  ?ncci ,  in  Latin  ,  which  fecmcti  to  us  to  be  wonderfully  pl- 
thyjand  CO  the  purpore,&c. 

JE.    K.  He  is  here  againe. 

'URIEL  ♦,,,.»    \\z.\\c\iV\xcz\.  give  ear  vntomjTxioid. 

Stay  a  while. 

A  Hereupon  Fr.  P:icci  did  kneel  on  both  his  knees.  Pranclfcsa 

URIEL  ♦»,.,.  True  it  is,  thittt  as  tky  fptrit  moved  thee  ^  i'o  Gjd  hath  called  thee  to  the  P»«;. 
partaking  and  undeillandirgot  his  will  to  be  fulfilled  in  punifliment  and  wTatii  againlt  the  fal- 
fhood  and  deceit  of  the  eaith.    Ar,d  therefore  hath  Cod  in  his  great  love  and  exceeding  mercy  cal~ 
led  thee  arnay  from  the  Somes  »f  the  Accurfed  ,    and  from  the  way  of  tinrighteitiffieffe  :  wherein 
ifthoHfollorvhtminfJmflicityofCoKfcience-,  and  right etufr.ejfe  (the  wo,  kj  of  faith)  thcujhalt 
he  confirmed:   for  I f.^j  unto,  thee ^  J  willpower  my  vetigeance  upon  the  whole  Farth  ,  aid  I  will 
chaff cyt  her  th  her  imq-aty  ,  and  in  the  midiefi-  tf  her  pride^  J  will  llirow  her  dawn  head-long^  and    . 
jhe jhall triumph  f:o  t;.'ore .-.  And hecanfe  thou  huft  hurnbled  thy  felf  ^  my  fptrit fhaU  be  with  thee,  Judiclicrn'Mh 
and  thoft  fljalt  if'tderftar.d.    And  tins  wicked  Monger ,  that  (itceth  in  the  Holy  Temple,  and  (In-  pet  a  domo 
neth  againft  the  Highsli  ,  iTiall  be  thrown  down  head-long  with  his  pride:  And  he  fliall  be  chalHlcd  ''ff- 
and  corrcfl-cd  witri  thc-mourhof  you  two  ;    Foratihe  houleof  the  Lord  Judgment  mult  begin.  ^ihSiServm. 
ji>!dthe  rebelling  ionnz  mtffi  be  fcourgedbefjre  the  wkktd  ihvznt  be  punijhed.     JFear  not^  IvfUl 
put  umo  jour  words ,  fl'teugt  h  *nd  power  ;    And  if  he  hear  you  not  ,  but  firetch  forth  his  hands  a- 
gainft  yoy. ,  /  wdl  rain  fire  and  brimflone  frem  Heaven  :  and  hu  dwelling  places  [hall  (Ink^  And 
the  Ldke^tPrat  fha/l  remain  ,  (hall  bear  witnejfe  againft  him  for  evermore :  Lift  up  thy  heart  there 
fore ,  and  defpife  the  iVorld ;  Fight  with  her  manfully,  and  be  not  overcome.    Moreover,  ack»(>w- 
ledgthy  finnes,  and  fly  unto  the  Lord.  Seekjout  his  Houfe  ■,  and  eat  of  his  bread:    for  thou  haft 
much  need  of  it. 

The  feeds  that  thou  hathfown  abroad ,  gather  up  again ,  leafi  thou  be  punifhedfor  the  fins  ofthj 
Brethren. 

Thy  Soule  ftandeth  deare  before  the  Lord  ^  which  is  the  caufe  that  he  hath  mercy  upon  thee ., 
which  jatth  ttmo  thee  ,  If  thou  be  obedient  before  the  Lord  ^  follow  the  in^ruEtions  and  difcipline 
of  the  half  (jhofi  :  ar.d  do  the  workj  of  righteoufnefs  and  Charity  ,  my  Spirit  jhall  refi  upon  thee, 
I  h.ivefaid, 

K.E.  He  is  gone. 

A  I  read  over  the  lall  parcel  in  Latins  to  Francis  Pucci:  after  he  had  in  very  penitent  fort 
thanked  God  ,'  coii'^eflcd  himklf  an  oftender,as  he  was  here  noted,  &c. 

E.K.  He  is  here  again. 

URIEL.  ,.,.^    Totir  Penance  and  Devotion  premifed ,  The  bleffing  of  God  the  Father  ,  the 
Son,  and  the  Ho'y  Ghoft,  in  his  everlafitng  truth   and  light  ■,  comfort  you ,  bleffeyoit,  and  be 
merciful  Uf  to  you. 
A  Amen. 
URIEL.  »,,,.  Extingue  lumen  :  Nam  decedo. 

A   Deo  noitro  Omoipotenti  ,  xcctno  Lucis  &  Veritatis  Authori 
fitomniskus,  gratia  aftio,  honor  &  gloria  ,  nunc  & 
fine  fine.    Amen. 


Anno  1*585    Augufli  6  P  R  A  G  £. 

Adionis  P//m^Mpofl:erior  pars. 

Videns,  {E,K.)  nubera  jam  recefTifle  confpexit :  ut  fupra  U  R I E  L  I  S  caput  (  quafi  in  a^re  )  Vldentcs  olim, 
alium  vidu  Angelum:  cuius  pars  inferiior,  nube  igneacontinebatur.  Capitis  veri  capilli ,  circa  "?"' ^j*^-"'* 


414     <5>^  ^^^^  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AUionsyWithjjiritsJ^c. 


humcros  Ipaiii ,  &  brachia  nuda  apparebant.  Dexcra  auteni  Librum  tenebat ,  quadrata  figura ,  teg- 
Bime,  (  quafi  jgnico,  lubicuiidoque  colore, )  vclatim  :  Folioiiim  vero  exterior  tnargo ,  albicans 
erar,  Septemrctinaeulis,  quafi  tocidem  feris ,  clauflis  cfTc  ,  liber  vidcbatur.  Atquc  fuper  retinacu- 
lorumora,  figilla  quafi  aurea,  imprefia  comparebaiu.  Et  fuper  fingulisfigillis,  littera;  infcriptse 
fingularcs.  Super  pi imo  E , liip.  2  M,  fiip.  3  E,  lup.  4 T,  lup.  5  T, lup.  6  A,  lup.  7  V.  .'oc|  nsi  ( 

„...  tyicci^e  lilrum  htitic  ,  &  z'critas  luce  m*gis  cUrefcat  '■  Et  lux  ,  veritatt ,  fiat  vdiidn. 
S^t^efi  tibi  pote^AS  dmdh  &  aferiendt  hunc  Librnm^  O^xndo,  &  (Ji^H»dis.  v- 

URIEL.  »,,„  Gratia  tibi,Rex  Cceli,  &  :errX5qui  fuirtj,es,  &  venturus  esjhinc  enim  Judiciun 
M-retricis. 

E.  K.  Jam  accipit  librum  URIEL,  Htrifqne  fiexis  genibns. 

URIEL.  .,»»,GauiJece,  o  Tosfilii  homini ,  levatecorda  veltraCoelum  verfus,  Sccretaenim 
Deipandunuir :  &  veibumejusex  caiceribuseniiflum  c(K  Gaudete,6  vos  Filii  Dei ,  quia  Spititus 
veritatis  &  Huclli/^cncia:  inter  vos  exiBit:  Gaudete,  6  vos,  qui  de  iandiiario  eftis ,  quia  fapiemia 
&  intclligeiuia  replebimini.  Gaiidete,  6  tu  domus  _7<«co^  ,  quia  jctm  tua  finira  ert  vifitatio,  atque 
Kicipic  vihtatio  tcia.  Quatuor  vcnti  tc  unacoUigent :  &  conculcatum  redificabis  mirum.  Tibico- 
habitabi:  fpoLllis.  Et,eece,  juiavJt  Dcmirus,  &:  noii  te  invadent  impietaccs;  nequeSpiritus  AI- 
tifluni  ate  rcccdct.  Vciiimj  Patrom  tuorum  oUa  quietem  naucifcentur :  &  tu  ipfe  zterna  hueris 
vita.  Sanguis  innocentum ,  ateabluetur:  &nd  dies  mukos  pcrnitentia  te  affligcs.  Tuncquidem 
Agnus,  in  medio piatcaium,  (tabit ,  oHieruiakm:  Edidtaque pioimilgabit  populo  tuo,  civibuf- 
que  tuis. 

Omnis  Nationcs  ad  domum  Davidis  .confluent  matres,  fuos  infoimabunt  infantis,  iis  ycrbis : 
Pracvaluit  ventas :  atque  Dei  nomcn,  tuus  erit  vigil,  6  Civitas. 

£.  K.    Jam^  omnia  ^  nuhe  alba  ^  opplcta  funt. 

URIEL.  .,,,,<J\UhiJtlei:tium^  vubisve/o  ,  ad  tempore  exigHtimintervallHm  ^quiesefie, 

E.  K.   Ex  ocidis  meis  prorfm  e<vanHere  pr  or  fits. 

A  Nota.  Intercaab  ipfo  Angelicofeimonc  ,  prifcriptain  Latinurnrccitaviconveifa,  legendo 
expedite,  ipfi Domino  Fraxctfco  Fuccio ,  pixtereaabiter pauca  locutuslum,  deCa- 
lumniiS ,  contra  noiiras  adioncs  talcs  oraculatis,  &c. 

E.  K.  Iteriwt  hie  mihi  apparet  \lne\  ^  atque  in  Cathedra  fedet 
Chryftallina  cum  Libro  illo  ,  in  fuo  gremio  :  dextra  autem  ,  illam 
tenet  'virgam  Geometric  am  :  ^  finifiray  illam  Philofophiam  i/itreamy 
Ht  prim. 

URIEL.  .,„,  Cum  mihi  fit  conceffa  poteflas,  &cum  meo  miniderio  fit  adjunfta  reritas ; 
(undc  lucis  &  veritatis  lumfactusplenus  )  vellras  cgoapcnam  oculos ,  atque  vobis  ipfam  cloquar 
veritatem;  uc  incrtem  illam  mokm  tenebraium  vellrarum,  et  profundi  ignorariia:,  cxcuterepo- 
fitis  ,  ctinlucccumpatribus  vertrisambularc.  Voci  igitur  mcaedijigenter  przbereaurem,  &  intra 
cordium  vefiroium  liquorem  ,  di6la  imbibatis  mea.  UtvcftrcE  intelligcntiaE  fuccus  ,  vigorem  reci- 
pere  polTi: :  &  vos  ipli  florere  politis  cum  acceptabili  veritatc ,  veluti  fervi  elcdi ,  et  Miniftri 
A  L  T  1 S  S  I  M  I. 

Totus  mundus  in  maligno  pofitus  eft  ,  aperta  Sacanc  fa£tus  d\  officina ,  ad  terrx  mercatorcs 
omni  abominanda:  impiccatis  generc  dccipiendum.  Aft,  quid  vofnefa(9i  cftistaliumnierciumfub 
meicatoresgaruli  ?  velmendaciorum  et  doftrirac  falfx,  in  publicum  vedlarii :  jEltiraatifnevos, 
levis  momentincgotiumeflcScripturaium  Divinarum  &  Mylteriorum  lenfuni,  judicium  et  teme- 
ritatialligare  veltrarum  imaginationum  ?  nihili  rem  eflefiatutis,  in  judicio  fedeie  contra  fpirituna 
Dei ,  nullum  illi  conccdendo  locum  ,  nifi  vcftro  ex  prxicripco  ? 

Vobifne  licet,  coram  Filio  Dei ,  intcgros  dies,  immo  injuftos  confumerc  annos ,  cumfiliis 
Satane  mendaci  fobole ,  &  mundi  deccptoiibus  ?  Adeone  penitus  in  abominationis  officina mvof- 
met  contuliftis  ut  Dei  filio ,  futuri  advcntus  fui  tcmpus  prxfcriberc  vclitis ,  Pr ophetarumque  fuoi-um 
dcfcenfus :  tcmpoiifque  teimlHum,  in,quo  ipfe  terram  erit  vifitaturus  ? 

./l/y/fx  nihil  loquiaufuseiat ,  nifiab  oieDei. 

Prophcti  Legem  non  explicabaiit ,  fed  Dei  vox. 

Pilius  D^: i  propria  lua  non  eli  locutus  verba ,  quatenus  Caro  erat ,  fed  verba  patris  fui. 

Dikipuli  ejus,  nihil,  nifi  ex  Spiiitu  fandlodocuerunt. 

Audetifiie  (  igicur  )  vos,  vobis  docendi  aflumere  munus ,  aditaque  fecrcta  AltilTiini  panderCj  mi- 
nim'e  ad  id  admifTi,  vocative  ? 

Dicitc  mihi ,  Mercaturamne  defeiuittis, vcftrarumque  pecuniarum  (fraude  partarum)  fupputatio* 
nes,  ut  verbi  Dei  efletis  Doftores  ? 

An  non  pudet  vos ,  ante  docere ,  quam  ipfi  intelligatis  ? 

Immb  an  non  vos  pudet  feducere,  prius.quaia  domum  rcdiicerc  novericis  ? 

Hypocrjtscltisp  JcSpiritulanitoYacwi,  "       ■ 

Mcndacw 


(^trm  9^elauon  o/Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  mthj^irits^  occ.    4 1^^ 

Mendaces effe  dcveniltis,  &  ipfius  Chiifti  ininiici,  &  llii  lancti  Spiiitus» 
Fortaflis  dicitis,  ex  Scripturarum  Le£tionc,  incclligentiam  comparamiis  earundcm. 
Aft  mihi  rel'pondeatis;  ciijus  fpiritus  aiixilio,  banc  vobis  compaiaiis  jntelligenciam  ? 
^uis  vobis  apparuit  Angclus  ?  vel  ex  quo  Cotlo ,  veftram  recepiftis  inftrutftionem^ 
Fieri  potett,  quod,  ex  Spiricu  tando  dicetis. 

O  rtuke  tu  niodicjeque  intelligentix  !  iion  intelligis  tu,  quod  Spiritus  fanflus  Ecclcfix  Pxdagogn^ 
ert,  intcgri  grcgis,  &  congregadonis  ChriHi  > 

Pfoiiide  f\  muIritudinisPrcdagogus  eft  ,  fcquitur ,  quod  Dodrir.a  aliqua ,  quam  Spivitus  fantSlaJ 
docct,  inrtm^li), documcntuin, live  intcUigenna iicmulcitudinis. 
Atqiii,  qux  hominum  mukitudo,  tux  e(t  intelligently  ? 
Vel  Cujus  es  tu  Congregation  is .'' 

Aliccr  d/fpfrjionis.  Dicifnc,  dilperius  alicujus  tc  unum  cffe  :  Falfumnarras,  fugitivus  es. 
Vcriim,  eccc,  re  doceo :  Errorque  tiius  ante  tuam  conftat  facicm. 

j^uicuiique  ad  Scripturam  jntelligentiam  pcrvenict ,  conari  debet  ad  illaiumintelligentiampriyc^ 
nirc,f  cciiiiduir.  Ordinationem,&  Traditionem  fpiritualcm. 
Aft  ex  qua  fpiritunli  traditione,  nadus  es  tu  intclligentiam  ? 
,  Vel  juxta  quam  Ordinationeui ,  tibi  eft  apertiis  Sci  ipturaii:m  fenfus  ? 

Dices  (  torlan  )  ex  lanctis  Patribus,  informacum  efle  te  ,  &per  eundem  fpiritum  pcrqueindo" 
rcbciit  illi,  tuam  te  eflc  confccutum  intclligentiam. 

Diccrc  lie  quidcm  potcs,  vciiiin  non  te  lie  taccre  certum  eft. 

5uiscnimantic]uorumPatrum,  rationem  copiilavit  vetbo  Dei,  vel  Scripturam  intelligentiam  > 
Ethnicoruniaftrinxit  difcipliiix  ? 

Tibi  dico,  quo  i  antiqui  Patres ,  Clirifto  chari  erant  >  &  cceleftium  vilionum  ,  conrolationumque 
Cccleftiura  participes :  qux  vihones  Caleftelque  confolationcs  non  illos  docebant  novam Scriptura- 
rum expolitionem  ,  fedconhrmabant,  luceque  illuftrabant  myfteria  Spirkusfancti,  perApoftolos 
decla;ata,  qui  Eccklia:  ipfi  lua  poluere  fundamcnta;  quicquid  igiturabantiquisPatribus  difcerc 
poftls ,  ab  Apoftolis  dilcis ,  &  quicquid  ab  Apoftolis  intelligis ,  habes  id  quidem  ,  a  Spiritu  lancto, 
;:d  li  iplos  Patres  exponas  tuo  fenlu  modoque  ,  &  non  juxta  fenlum  Apoftolorum  ,  ccrte  Spiritual 
iaiictum  non  habes,  led  Ipiritum  mendacii. 

Hurailem,  igKur,tcmet  prxbeto,  &  coram  Domino  procidas,  rationem  femoveas,Dominoque  ad- 
haeireas,  laborclque  verbum  ejuldem  intclligere,  ex  Spiritu  fuolancto  :  quern  Spiritum  fanctum,  omni 
ex  .'lecelficate  i:ivenire  dcbes,  atque  invenies  mvilibiU  Eccleha  ul'que  ad  m.undi  finem.         ? 

Pcrfpicue  tibi  dicam,  (  ut  Veritas  potenter  in  luce  appareat  )  quicunque  Dei  contrarius  eft  volun- 
tati->  qui  liix  eft  cradita  tcclclisB  per  Apoftolos  quidem  publicata ,  per  Spiritum  fanctum  enutrita  ,  8c 
mundo  unpeitita,  5i  per  Petrum^d  ^oOT«OTaadicta,8c  per  eundem  ibidem  cxprelTa,  ab  ejuldem  fuc- 
ceiroribiis  retcnta  atque  I'uftentata  eft :  Hie  idem  Deo  Scveritaci  fuse  contrarius  eft. 
LmherHs  fuorum  lecepic  mercedera. 
^alvintts  iuam. 

Reliqui  omnss  quo:quot  erraverunt,  &  fponte  in  devia  concurrerunt,{eparando  feipfos  ab  Ecclefia 
&  Congrcgacione  Chnfcij  obftinate  &  Diaboli  (patris  fui)  inftinctu  ,  mercedem  fuam  rcce- 
perunt' 

Contra  quos  filius  Dei  judicium  pronunciabit,  dicendo  .• 

Itc  Deceptorcs  tn  gehennx  igncm,Patri  veftro  &  filiis  illius,ab  exordio  praeparatum. 
Inter  vos  iplobinlurgitisaflerendo,  Papam  Antichriftumeffe  (  hoc  enim  nomine  ilium  infioni- 
tis  )  horn  J  ceie  malus  effe  pollit,  atque  a  lua  excidere  vocatione  ,  verumtamen  Antichriftus  efle 
nunquan  poteit. 

Ancichnftus  enimillecft,  qui  filius  eft  Diaboli ,  homo  quidem  ex  carne  &  fanguine  natus  ex 
impia  &  hau-iuknca  meretricc ,  qui  populos  feducet  tumidufque  fui  patris  potentia  ,  Deorefiftecia 
Terra  inter  homines,  quemadmodum  pater  ejus  in  Caelofecerat  mter  Angclos  i  prorfus  dcnegando 
Dei  Ominpo-.entiam  leqlie  illi  opponendo, 

O  vosftuitiSc  exiguiintelligentix,  quum  Apoftolis  Cceliconcredabanturclaves :  (quafi  dice- 
res)  eadein  Chriiti  Jefu  filii  Dei  viventis  ,  authoritas  &  poteftas  ad  hominemcondonanda  pcccata, 
&  ad  pcccatorcs  CceIo  excludcndos  ,  &quum  *  eifdem  Apoftolis,  vade  poft  me  Satana  j  etiamdi-  s  -,,     ,  .  >■ 
cebatur,  non  tautaeltis  intcUigentiaut  in  Altillimi  hxcintrolpicerevalcatismyftena.  c.  D 

Si  Dei  filius  tfti  comm^ndabat  tum  etiam  reprehendebat  Difcipulosfuos,  cur  non  pcftit  igitur 
Epifcopus ,  &  bonus  &  malus  cenferi?  Si  hincconfequatur ,  bonum  malumque  Epifcopo  inefle 
poff:- ,  pari  racionc  interripolfit  authontatisEpifcopalis  rationem ,  a  bono  malove  illo  non  pendere, 
fed  ipiius  ad  Epiicopi  vitam  hoc  bonum  maliimve  fpcdtare  ft  bonus  fit ,  fux  bonitatis  metet  beneficium; 
fin  malus  fit ,  mendax  eft  ;  lua  enim  illi  contrana  eft  doitrina.  Proinde  ,  fi  ,  propter  hominum 
peccata  Deus  permilerit ,  .mukos  in  fpiritu  *  zAfitnU  federe  in  loco  fan6lo,id  quidem  propter  pec-  *  ^a  j,  ^ 
cacav-ltraeir,  &  rebelkm  naturam  ,  utfupplicium  recipiatis :  &  non  obfcura  vel  tenebrofa  ejus 
nerct  Ecclefia. 

Aperiteicaqueoculos  veftros&intelligite,  &  Ecclefix  adhasrkatis,  amore  ipfius  Ecdefiac,  85 
non  hominum.  Ncque  Ecclefiam  contemnacis ,  propter  hominum  iniquiratis. 
'  Verutm 


4i5  ^  trmrelation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  AUionsjmth^mts^, 


Verum  coUa  lUi  fubmutaus  faiifto  jugo  &;  nrdlnationi ,  quae  vos  duett  ad  lUam  Congtcgationcm 
quae  gubcrnator  per  Spiritiim  Dei,  in  qua  intcUigetis  fecrcta  Libri  Dei,  explicata  elle  juxuknfum 
aiuiqiioium  vellioium  Panum :  qucrum  innlhgentia  crat  dignitus  Spititus Saudi. 

Noil  pd:eflis  a  vobis  ipfis  authoritatemrccipere  ,  Miiiic  authoritas  nihil  facerepotefl is. 
I(|circ6  cum  vcrtra  autlioruas  niiUa  fit ,  cur  Ecdelia  opcia  Adavc  intra  vcrtras  arripuis  manus ? 
MaUfidcipof-       ^^^^  quidem  res  eil  ,  ?cfipuuarura  aliqucm  c^uxrere  intclhgcntiam  -.  atque  alia  d\  Scripturas 
'^'  dpccrs,  kcuiidum  intcUigcntiain  fuam.  ^u  enim  docec,  ex  authori:ate   docer  :  led  authorita- 

tem  li  non  habcat  ufurpator  five  iiuiulor  cfi. 

Fiacr: s  m: i ,  Conliderate  vofmct  ipfos  bene  ,  &  conl'deiatc  vos  pueros  efle ,  &  quod  yedrl  juris 
.    noalKiskdalicni.   Nihiligitur  faciadsquafiex  vobis  ipfis:  lcdinhllaris(  ut  piieri  boni  )  vcrtigijs 
Mauisvijlbx-,  qux  Matcrpuia  Vugoeh  ,  &llmpcr  a  Paradetifapientiainfoimatur,  qucm  vobis 
(  puciis  ejus )  cxhibere  cibv.m  debet ;  &  quo  vos  modo  educare  atque  inlhuerc. 

Simplicius  mukum  vakt  &  obedi:ntia,  ccttum  elt,  coram  Domino;  All  curioJitas Diabo- 

luscCt. 
XaJi.7.*\i.C       ^,,  non  Icgillis  quid  lanif^orurapanis,  iion  fit  ante  canes  proj:cicr.dus? 

■*^'"'*^'  Peuicaisvolmc:  txarainctis,utnim  canes  fitis,  nee  ne. 

Videtc  utrum  vita  vcftrafani^a  fit,  opera  vcllra  lei'Va  &  julh  ;  patientia  vcfcra  multiplex;  affli- 
Ciio  vckra,  magna  propter  Dominum. 

Si  volinct  ipVos ,  inhocftatuefle,  minime  d:prelicndacis ,  pueri  non  clcis;  fi  pueri  haudfitis, 
noneftis  filii  •  filnliihaud  fitis  matrcmnon  habttis ;  fin  veio  matrcm  nonhabet,  devoiatoreselHs 
illius  panis  qui  fihis  dcbetur,  canini ,  iafeafMi,  &  contra  Deum  eltis. 

Ill  veUi  i  ig\tur  judicium  Icatus  vcs  iph  deiccndatis. 
Vox  h.*c  in-  Tatcr  Confiderate,  per  Deum  Creatieitis^ 

Strlpumt  mul-  Filim  Confideiate,  per  Deum  Redempti  elcls. 

iHm  ttjiuta.  Spirit M  S-    Confiderate  ctiam,  rtli-Hi  ekis  Spirituali  Tutcli  &  conlblationi  Dei. 

QUI  Deus  ex  vobis coi.grcgationcm  ordinavit,  landamSc  fandificatam  Iccictatcm,  palccntem 
lemper  fimul  tanquam  fratrcs ,  Tub  alis  i'uis  &  infiia  menla  ;  qui  vos  palcit  vita  &  intcUigentiac  panas; 
«orpore  (nimii  urn)  &  languine  Jefu  Chrifci  filii  Dei  viventis. 

InteUiocntise  autcm  pane  vospafcit,  utpatiis  vefcii  voluntatem  intelJigatis  ,  qui  in  Cctlis  efc ; 
O'jcdicntia  ut  illi  quum  novcritis,  obcdientcs  fa^is;  quse  ebedientia  vekrx  vocationis  finis  ift. 

Nullo  i'^'icur  modo  obedientiae  jugumexcuciatis,  de  fimul  eciam  Calicem  intelligentia:  a  vobis 
repellatis;  atque  ea  ratione  Patris  vdcri  voilatcat  voluntas. 

Scd  judicio  meo  famclici  eltis ,  vcl'cra  contiada  Tunc  inteltint  ,  oflanetvique  mariekunt. 

Qiiz  hujus  rei  caul'a  eft  ?  quando  ilium  Domini  pancm  rccepilcis  ?  quando  nutrimemum  accepifcis? 
6  vos  modics  fidci  &  intelligentiae  minoris  trratis ,  &  derii  curricit.  Cocci  eltis ,  patris  veltri  ,  non 
obt:mpci  atis  voluntati ;  rcdice  ,  reditc  &:  intra  vofmet  ipios  talia  dicatis. 

O  fempiternc  Deus,  Scbeni^ne  Pater,  magna  cciie  eltciiia  mifericordiaque  tua  crganos,  quo* 
ind;:vi3aiflospcrSaiaiiam,  Siipiritum  tcncbrarum  leduxifii  domurnj  &  nobis  coecis praepoluilci 
(  vilu  eciam  nobis  reki:uco  )  vcram  Icmicam  lincamque  recram  uuclligentii.  O  nos  laelices ,  quos 
tibi  cam  charos  habcs  ;  &c  quorum  Talus  canct  tibi  cuiS  elc.  Nomen  proindc  tuum  ,  laudibus  cclcbra- 
bimus ;  acanolcris  levertemur  erroritus.  Pcccata  conficebimur  noi'tra,  8c  prScepta  obiervabimus 
tua.  .S^uoniam  tu  Iblus ,  oDominc,  jukus  &  verus  cs,  &  milericordia  tua  iterna  elc.  Leges  tuat 
ilia  VIS  linn,  cc  per  amans  cuabcnignicas  inter  nosvalida  tic.  Sanctus,  SanccuSjDominusDeusZc- 
baoch.  Honor  omnis  laus  et  gloria  cibi  detur  in  p:rpecuum. 

A  tyiinen. 

UK  I  EL d^adicotra^faBotemporiifpaiionvertam. 

E.   K.    Abiit. 

A     Noca. 
A  Interim  fr^w//ti? /'«c"ahxc  (qux  Anglicc  dictata  rcccpimus)  Latine  recitabam.  Nolil- 
que  ncrvofa  valde,  nolli  i fque  accommoda  infcicutis  vidcbancur. 

E.  K.    Iter  urn   ilium  adeffe    'Video. 

URIEL.    ,,,„  F.ancilce  attemis  anri(>t*s ,  vtrb;i  excipi-u  mc*. 

S  I  S  T  AT  I  S     PAULttLUM.  ^ 

A  Hiacl^atim,  FraficifauTuccitu  i  fcJe  Ilia  g^nibus  utiifquc  (quafi  Dfo  fupplex  )  terrain 
pcccbat. 

LIR  IE  L.  „.,.  Vcium  quidem  efc  (  uttuus  te  alias  commune  fecit  fpiricus  )  quod  Deus  tevo* 
cavit  uc  particeps  &c  intcUigens  elles  voluntatis  fui  explcndx  ,  in  vindida  &  ira  lua  cxercenda, contra 
terrae  falhLatem&traudcm.  _  _  ^ 

Atque  banc  ob  caufinn  ,  ex  magno  fuo  amorc  ,  &  immenla  naifeticordia  fua  avocavit  teDcus  a 
filiishominum  ,  Deo  inviforum,  Scab  injuliitixtramicc. 

In  qua  tua  vocatione ,  fi  ilium  imiteris  ,  in  tu3C  confcientir  fimplicitate ,  &  jurtitia  (  qux  hdei 
funt  opera  )  confiimabcfis.    Tibi  enim  dko,  vifidiitaui  meam  eftlindam  fupcr  univeifara  terrain 

atque, 


^^true  9^etation  of  Dr.  t)tthbAUms,  mthj^irits,  &c.    417 

atque  illam  cattigabo  in  iniqiiitatc  lua  ,  SC  in  lux  liiperbic  lumiiiD  gradu  il!am  praicipicem  podernam; 
ncque  uUra  criuniphabir. 

E:  quia  tc  dcmififum  humilanqus  exhibuifti  Ipiritus  meus  tecum  crit ,  &  intelligcntiam  tu  con- 
fcquens. 

Et  mondrum hoc  impium  ,  quod  inTempIofanftofedet,  &contra  Altifl^mum  peccat ,  pr«ci- 
picabicurcumCuperbialua,  Atque  ex  ore  utnufquc  vdlricaliigabitur  &  corrig:tur.  Judicium  enim  fp,»l'"' 
a  Uom-)  Dei  inchoan  debet ,    H  rtlius  rebcllis  prius  flagclliscxdi  debet ,  quam  impius  puiiiri  fervus,        '^  "^  ® 

Ne  timjacis,  V-i^ris  enim  verbis,  vires  &  poc:nciam  adjungam. 

Etveltra  li  contemnat  verba  manuique  luas  contra  vos  ex:rat :  de  Cab  ignis  acque  fulphurij 
dcmittam  imbrem,  &  Palatia  cjuldem  in  tcrram  delcendent:  lacufciue  ibidem  rcmanens  contra 
ilium  cell  i:n  )nium  dabit  perpetuum. 

Erigas  igicur  cor  tuum  mundumque  defpicias .  &  contra  ejufdem  vcriliter  pugna  ,  nequeabeo- 
•  dem  v  means.  x  ,    yi  ^'1 

Tua  paexreaconfitearispeccata:  &ad  Dominum  confugias ,  iliius  perquirito  dcm^um ,  &de 
illius  pane  comedas :    eoenim  multumtibi  opus  eft. 

Ec  lemina  qua:  Iparlim  feminaiii ,  iccolligas:  ne  forte  tu  pocnas  tuas ,  ob  fratrum  tuorum 
pcccata. 

Ammi  tua  Deo  chara  eft  J  atque  idcirco  milciicordia  crgate  movetur,  tibique  dicit,  fi  coram 
Diomino  obediens  appareas:  atque  lequaris  inftiuctiones  &  difcfplinam  Spiritus  l'an<5^i  facialquc 
opera  Jultiax  &  Chantatis,  Ipiritus  mcus  liiper  te  requiefcet. 

Dixi. 
£.  K.   Abiit. 
A     Ex  Anghcis  diAatis  iftis  ultimis  Latine  eundem  exprefli  Icnfum  ,  Domino  Tr.  Puccio^  yalde 
devoco  humili ,  &  prxmiffa  agaol'centi  &  acc^anti,  &c.    . 

E,  K.  hcrum  mihi  confpicnHs  eji. 

UR  ItL.  „.».  Prxmiffa  veftra  tam  pocnitentia  quam  devotione ,  BenediftioDei  Patris 
Filii,&  Spiritu  lantiii,in  lua  fempiternaveritateluceque  vos  confoletur,  vobifque  benedicat,*  vobis 
mirerxordiam  impertiat   copiolam* 

A   Aracn. 


•  Ex  A^ieftCt  qif^erat  dieyeneriSfSeptcmhr  6.  l^?$,  Pra^*,. 

EatVaccins^Htfromifflsferfciendisp'OvidcMt'  .    ^ 

tAt  cor  habeat  fincertimreEiitmqHe.  Jlnimi  vox. 

Jmmo  fitfe  frefrias  detergat  calietas.  , 

Inter  eu  ndem  auttm  aHoquatHr  mortua  arhnfin^  de  Domino  vtnturo. 

ytmbulet  cnm  mMitibiu  ut  ttliejus  aitdire  pejjlt. 

Tunc  revert A$ftr  ut  (juad  reliquum  tfi  sd  implere  fojfit* 

Atcjui  dico  proprios  tergat  caliceos, 

;    A  Vos  oro  ut  lUam  nobis  explicate  phrafem  yclicis  obfcuram, 

Qififlagellaturipfefentit.  jttlgeric*  vi.f 

Angelica  vox.   ,.,+»  Reli(jui  {jejmiivefiri)  diet\  non  hie  compUhmtHr  ■,  fed  in  iHit  vi£iiiti 

ebeb/tt  ^  in  qmbtts  Romx  operari  DeeretHm  efi  mihi. 


It  LIBBR 


tviV 


41 8   ^A  true  relation  cfDr.  Dee  his  ABions.  mtb^iritf,8<.c. 


LIBER    RESURRECTIONIS. 

Vraga ,  Aprilis  30. 
Padum ,  feu  Foedus  Sabbatifmi. 


Threbone 

oaob 


Z  I     i 


Venimus  c 
Septcmb.  14. 


I  <(  85.    ^  ^"  L^itio  2 9  Exilii  Bscrttum  contra  »os  exih  *  C<tfare  Rod. 

'    \  In  Angufto  8, Reverfionis  fermifsio  D.  Rolenbergio,  ottinente Ht  4d[u4  vtMittntHt* 


cMtracHlnnty  &faUummem»randmntnferfetfiHm. 

S  f.iiT.ltood  at  the  end  of  the  Galery  by  his  Chamberjlooking  over  into  the  Vineyard 
he  fccmcd  to  lee  the  little  man  the  (jariin&r ,  in  all  manner  of  behaviour  and  appa* 
rel ,  who  is  the  chief  vvorkman  or  over-feer  of  Mr.  Carpio  his  workmen  in  the  fame 
Vine-yard.  Heleemedvery  handfomly  to  prune  feme  of  the  Trees:  at  length  he 
approached  under  the  wall  by  E.K.  and  holding  bis  face  a  way-ward  he  laid  unto 
him,  Qnafo  dicM  Domttto  DoClori  quodvemat  adme.  And  fo  went  away  as  it  were  cutting  here 
and  there  the  Trees  very  handfomly,  and  at  length  over  the  Cherry-trees  by  the  houfe  on  the  Rock  ift 
the  Garden  he  lecmed  to  mount  up  in  a  great  piUer  of  fire. 

E.K.  bade  his  Wife  to  go,  and  fhc  who  waS  in  the  Garden.  She  came  up,  and  brought  hirti 
word,  Nobody, 

E.  K.  then  came  to  me  and  faid  ,  I  think  there  is  fome  wicked  fpirit  that  would  allude  me ,  and 
he  told  and  faid  to  me ,  as  is  before  noted.  Then  faid  I ,  I  will  go  into  the  Garden,  and  bade  E.  K. 
come  with  me.  We  went  down  that  way  which  diis  Creature  did  go:  but  nothing  we  faw ,  went 
to  the  Banqueting-houfe  in  the  Vine-yard ,  but  that  place  pleafed  us  not:fo,we  went  along  in  the  way 
by  the  cl  iff  fide,  and.fat  down  on  the  bank  by  the  great  pyle  of  Vine-ftakes  lying  in  the  very  South  end 
of  the  Vine-yard.  And  we  had  not  fat  there  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  but  lefpyed  under  the  Almond- 
tree,  and  on  the  South-fide  of  it ,  being  the  We(krly  Almond-tree  ,  that  is  i:  which  1$  itandmg  on 
the  Wcfcerly  fide  of  the  ftraight  path  which  leadeth  from  ths  North  toward  che  South  in  the- Vine- 
yard, lefpyed  (  I  fay  )  like  ajheet  affaire  rvhite  paper  lying  tojfed  to  and  fro  in  the  wind.  *'  I  rofe 
J*-<Sfd_;,-.^..H:to  ic ,  and  (  to  the  prayfe  of  God  his  truth  and  power ,)  there  I  f«und  three  of  my  Book* 
"  lying,  which  were  loililigendy  burnt  the  tenth  day  of  April  laft. 

1  The  three  Books  were  ,  Enoch  his  Bookj 

2  The  48  Cloves  tyingelicit. 

5  And  the  third  was  the  Book  ofmy  gathering  of  the  thirty  Aires,  and  entitled  i/^#r^«V»f// 
terrejiris  attxHH  &  viEloria. 

Thereupon  S.  K.  comming  to  me ,  I  fell  on  my  knees  with  great  thanks  yeilding  to  the  God 
Almighty,  and  fo  did  £.  AT.  whofe  mind  and  body  were  mervailoufly  aftedted  at  the  fight  of  the 
"  faid  Books,  having  no  fliew  or  figne  that  ever  they  had  been  in  the  firc,neither  by  colour  or  favour, 
*^  orany  thing  wanting. 

And  aher  we  had  let  half  an  hour  under  the  fore-faid  Almond-trce«  prayfing  God  and  wondring 
at  the  Miracle.  'Suddenly  appeared  by  us  the  felf-fame  Gardiner  like  pctfon ,  but  with  his  face  fome- 
what  turned  away,  and  nothing  thereof  to  be  adjudged  as  oiAvt  the  cufteme  is.  He  faid ,  Kell/y 
follow  mc ,  £,  K,  went,  and  I  fat  IhU.  awaiting  his  rcturnf 

Thk 


(^true  T^elatJon  o/Dt.  Dee  his  A&ms,  mth  joints y  &c.    4!^ 


This  Gardiner  went  before  £.A'.  and  his  feet  fecmcd  noc  to  couch  che  ground  by  a  toot  hei^hc, 
A*8d  as  he  went  before  H. /^.I'o  the  doofcs  did  feemc  to  open  before  him,  he  led  him  uptheg'eac 
rtairs  on  the  left  hand  by  the  Vineyard  door,and  fo  in  at  his  oWn  Chamber  door  where  £iA',hatl)  tiis 
new  Study,  and  then  the  door  goinp  out  ot  that  to  the  kairs  opened  of  it  fclf,  and  h"  wentup  thofe 
ftairs,  &  at  length  brotight  htm  to  the  Furr.Ace  mouth  where  all  the  Bockj  (tnd,  papers  had  been  b^irKt 
the  10  dayofthti  April,  And  ccmirg  thither,  there  the  fpiritual  Creature  didfecm  to  let  one  of  his 
feet  on  the  poft  on  the  right  hard  without  the  Furnace  mouth,and  with  the  other  to  if  cp  to  the  Fur- 
nace mouth,  and  foto  reach  into  the  Furnace  (  the  bricks  being  now  plucifcd  away  which  Hopped 
the  mouth  of  the  Furnace  ,all  fnvirg  one  brick  thick  )and  as  he  had  reached  into  the  furnace  there 
appeared  a  great  \^^'-,  as  it  there  had  been  a  window  in  the  back  of  the  Furnace,and  alfo  to  £.  K.  the 
hole  which  was  no:  greater  then  tlie  thickntfs  of  a  brick  unllopped,did  fecme  now  more  then  three  or 
"  four  brick  thicknds  wide,  and  f*  over  hi^  fiooulder  backji'.irst  he  did  reach  to  E.JC."!!  tue  refl  of  the 
^^  fiandiyig  Books,  excepting  the  Book^out  cftvhieh  the  lafi  y^ttidnwas  {•«/,  and  Fr.  Pucci  his  Recan- 
* '  tati '«,  alfo  to  E.  K.  appeared  tn  the  Furnace  all  the  reji  of  the  papers  vhich  were  mt  m  then  dc 
'■^  livered  out .  .   , 

That  being  done,  he  b.-ide  E.K  go,  and  faid  he. (hould  have  the  rcfl  afterward.He  went  before  in  a 
little  fiery  cloud,  and  E.  K.  followed  with  the  Books  ui  dsr  his  arm  all  along  the  Gallery  ,  and  came 
down  the  (fairs  by  Fr.  Pucct  his  Chamber  door )  and  then  his  guide  letc£.  K.  and  he  brought  me  the 
B^oks  unco  m/  phccuiuieich:  Al  nouJ-cree. 


-j-     Pragdi, 


1 5  8(5    Apr  ills  3  o  LT^t-ij-  even. 
Mane  cuca  8. 


A      Prccibiis  quibuldamfuilsadDeum,  Sigi-atiispro  miraculoHefternoa^is,  petebamHsjam 
.  ,a  Deo  confilium  fuum  quidde  ilfo  miraculo  nobis  clFec  faciendum  ulterius,&c. 

Et  quid  laciemus  cum  Domino  Roftnbergto  •,  an  ilium  debeamus  admittere  adamicitiam 
noHram  &  fcrdus  fandum  ?  quid  de  ejus  oblatis  ardibus,  &c. 

£.iC.  A  voice  comnieth  down  right  before  me  faying. 
^„  ^,    tw,,  /\  *      c  E.  K.  Who  IS  this  fVilliam} '^'^"'""^^ 

.n.«W.ll,am.  AApaufe      ^    ^ '"'Pf «  K  to  be  the  Lord  ^^A^^.r^-  ^ 

Thou  William  of  Rofenberg.  A  A  greater  paule 

.  This  day  in  the  Bloud  of  the  Lamb  ,  do  I  pronounce  forgivenefs  ofjinnes  ■,  upon  thee  :  Mndfor  a 
figne   ani  token  :  Thy    lines  [hall  be  opened,  and  thy  feed  fhall  be  multiplyed  upon    Sarth 
''therefore  take  itnte  thee  tt  Sheep  .f  that  is  yet  a  Lamb  ^  and  fpoile  not  the  fiock_of  thy  pior  neigh[^ 
kaftr^"^  ■'■  ■  ■  ■  » 

ft/ZW,  behold^  if  thcti  turn  thy  felf  from  the  North ^  and  afcend  unto  the  Holy  t^ountaifiy     ^ 
.[and]  I  will  hereafter  make  "  Covenant  vdth  thee.  But  take  heed ,  thou  defpife  me  not. 

Blejfed  are  thife  that  are  comforted  of  me  ,  for  their  firengthis  from  above.  For  whofoever  it 
rebuked  of  the  fptrit  of  truth  ,  ihall  with  time  perifh  as  ajhadow. 

yis  it  not  faid  ^  iftkyeyeojfendthee,  cafi  htm  out  ^  I  fay  untothee  alfo,  yea  .,  though  thy  head 
tffend  ,  CAp  htm  alfo  awaj.  The  anfiab/e  fVhifperings  avd  wordly  Polltcies  offuchas  are  the 
trmces  of  the  World.,  are  they  not  known  unto  mee  ? 
tO   yoH  Hypocrites !  0  jou  Itttle  of  underflandiug,  and  tf  left  faith  ,  how  far  are  you  in  love  with 
thetVorld ,    and  her  pomp  ,  with  the  fiejh  and  her  lightnefs  or  wantonnefs  ,  with  the  Divel  and 
his  damnable  fubtiltj  !   Purge  your  honfes-,  and  purge  your  Kingdomes ,  if  yttt  will  fiir  up  the  Co^Jtltf"!' 
Lord  to  firengthtn  you.    Curfed  itthat  Nation,  that  defiled  her  felf  with  the  fociety  offuchas 
are   Bayards.     "But  wo,  wo  ,  be  u»ie  htm   that   Ruleth  not    according  to  the  length   of  his' 
brtd'e. 

7  he  chaff  eft  his  Empire  ard  Kingdom  y  behold  it  remAineth  ^  the  father  fweptitnotoitt^nei-'  Vtlmpcrio^^, 
ther  dot  h  the  Son  lift  up  his  hand  for  the  name  of  the  Higheji.  **"  '^'S'o  ^o-  ' 

O  you  Hypocrites  ■,  you  are  faithlefs  ^  far  you  fulfil  not  four  charge! 

%ThoH  hup  ,   yet  time  to  awal^  ,  thoM  may  ft  yet  be  acceptable,  '  Time  yec, 

'      Thy  don,gs  let  them  be  a  fudge  between  thee  and  me, 

!^  Magna  paufa,  A       ' 

Vox  .„.,  Behold  y  I  have  given  thee  unto  Rofenberg,  him  alfo  have  laiven  ftntothee^.  ^^^   ^°'^^  *" 
JVho-foevcr  therefore  canfidereth  not  the  giver  [hall  be  called  to  account  and  that  Inarply.  expounded    m 

In  the  yeareM'^  J  will  fend  out  my  vifitation  that  the  ends  of  the  world  may  be  k»own,  andthat  queft" 
Jufiice  may  apveare  tn  the  garments  of  her  unmeafurable  honor,  ^„„g  g j^        1 

/« the  mean  feafon  ,  I  will  blefs  you  abundantly  with  all  the  gifts  and  feeds  of  nature.  See  there-  ^(ofier  keac 
fore,,  that  y»H  work.')  and  labour  that  your  hands  may  bring  ftrth  fruit ,  the  incrtafe  #/ (As  A'»'i^« « 
lord.  ■       ■      .  T>:m, 

,     ^'-^  li  a  •  Six 


42:o  ^  true  rcUtim  oft)t,  pee  bis  ABims^  mtbj^mts.Scc. 


iex  A6iior,es 
julure  &  Sub- 
buthum. 
Fox  7. 

which  Fiyday. 
*  From  good 
Fryday. 
Our  Heaven- 
ly Kalendcrof 
fix  moneths 
/\ftion. 
The  reft  red 
Books  to  be 
nioft  clofcly 
kc-t  until  the 
fix'h  Adien. 
Dowiiii   mhi- 
cuiiim  fab  fi- 
lm 10  til    te- 
W:ndum, 
willielmm  2 
Refenberg. 
faciendus  efl 
confdus  fuo 
tempore. 
Omnia  rcliqxi 
reflituentuf 
qiiie  igni  com- 
mltiehnfitttr. 
E.K.  and  A 
together. 
Adam  cf  Ne»- 
hoitfe  Lord 
Chancelor. 


Six  AB:ions  joufljAll  haiic  :  the  [eventh  is  the  Sahbath  of  the  Lor  As ,  twAfrtm  this  Any  {hi»g^ 
apart  of  the  time)  be  gin  M»g  from  *  Fryday  lafi  celtbmtedy  as  the  memorial  of  him  through 
jvhom  I  fpeak^unto  jou  ,  which  fitfered  upon  the  Croffefor  jour  %edemptt»n ,  ttntil  the  day  com$ 
ofthefixth  Aianeth-,  yottfhallmt  preliuTie  to  aske  any  vilkacion  of  him  that  fpeaketh  rvtthyou.  And 
fo  the  fixih  Moncth  (die  laft  day  eufMiKg)[hall  alwayes  bej»Hr  day  of  AElton. 

§   Vwcciis  di-filed-,  ar.dfhall  not  be  partaker  oii\\ziQ(-i:f.s\CM-!iiion%tocom-i  :  but  jhall  depart  from 

yoK,  and  be  ready  as  the  LsrdjhaH  find  him  ,  and  as  he  fhall  be  warned  of  you.  Notreithfianding 

myfptrit  (kaU  not  depart  from  him. and  I  will  open  his  nndnfl  anding  that  he  may  convert  many.   Far 

the  World  mtifi  he  f^tiified  with  tejltmony  as  well  of  his  lifc,<«  the  recantation  &  profejfed  DoHri^se. 

A  We  lack(6  Lord)his  recantation  written  by  his  oath  hand,I  cannot  find  it  i^  cHe  Books  re!iorcd. 

Thofe  Book.s  let  them  be  f^pt  of  thee ,  as  ccmmftted  tt»to  thy  cnjiody  by  me.  And  fee  that  they 
be  fiever  opened  until  tbe  fix  th  yiSltontocome. 

See  alf) ,  thtt  yoH  dtfclofe  not  my  hand  amongjt  yo» ,  leAJt  I  then  rife  tip  againjt yott. 

For,  behold^  yoit  are  yet  in  the  PVtlderneffe .    1  here  fore,  be  filent. 

ZJ"to  Will  in  m  ,  nottvithfianding  (  hereafter  )  all  things  may  be  knoivn ,  a?!d  made  manifeft. 

If  any  man  fcek^you  ^  elfe^  yoH  know  him  not. 

For  yoH  live  within  the  filence  of  the  Htghejt^ 

The  red  chat  wancech  ,  fhall  be  reitored  unco  you  :  even  unto  the  leall  and  laft  letter. 

Ltve ,  therefore  ,  together  as  in  th  e  hands  of  your  Proteilor. 

And  doubt  not  y  but  that  I  will  be  merctfrtl  unto  htm  that  is  ftck^threugh  his  infirmity  :  yea  ^ 
and  unto  his  generation  as  I  have  promifed.  And  the  Jinne  which  remaineth  in  his  Fathers  hottfe , 
and  m  his  hotsfefor  m^n] generations^  1  wtll  mercifully  blat  out. 

1>o!ibt  not,  my  peace(which  am  peace^  the  beginning  and  the  enditig)fhall  alwayts  he  amongfi  you. 


A  We  read  all  and  had  long  difcourfe  a   What  fhall  I  fay  unto  Rofenberg  of  your  prefent 

of  all)  and  at  laff,  I  asked  thus.  merciful  dealing  and  intent  toward  him. 

Vox  ,„,,  That,  which  is  faid  of  him,  that ,  fay  thou  A   unto  him. 

Move  no  more  qttefitoHs. 

A  Beiicdicitc  Domino  omni^  opera  ejus,  laudate  ilium  omnes  Creaturae ejus :  laudent  ilium 
Angeli  ejus ,  laudent  ilium  S'andi  ejus :  ilk  iblus  e(t  Omnipotens,  ille  folus  efl  Sanctus  ,  ille 
Pioteccornorcn,  Illuminator  &  Confolatoriiofterefc.  Cinguliomnis  honor  &  gloria,     t/imen. 


MEMORANDUM. 

IjSd.    A  fay   I.  , 

On  May  day  after  diiine-- 1  went  over  the  water  (  being  brought  to  the  water  lide  in  the  Lord 
Rofenberg  his  coach  ,  and  Jacobus  Menfchick  with  me)  unto  the  Lord  Rofenberg  his  GardenSjand 
lodging  by  the  water-fide,  whether  became  to  me  by  appointment.  To  whom  when  I  had  read  in 
Latin  (  eA-?ew/>or^)  the  things  that  concerned  him,  I  asked  bimw'hat  he  had  done,  fince  the  time 
ot  my  being  with  huai ,  chat  I  may  tlie  better  undcrttand  thefe  words  fpoken  to  him  and  of  him. 

He  told  ,  that  he  had  often  prayed  ,  fince  unto  God  for  tlie  forgiveViefs  of  his  fins,  and  to  open 
his  eyes  how  he  might  fcrve  him ;  and  to  make  it  to  be  evident  unto  him  whether  he  is  to  marry  or 
no,  and  whcre,oriii  what  fiock  or  kindred.  And  if  it  were  his  divine  Will,that  he  might  receive  com- 
fort and  inftructian  by  me,and  thatthefe  and  fuch  macters,and  fcmewhat  earnefdy  he  had  prayed  alfo 
forhisMr.  thcEmpi;rc)ur,  thathe  might  bend  himfelf  to  enjoy  God  hisfavour,yea,for  hisown  mar- 
riage and  amending  of  his  loolc  life,  while  he  yet  fat  at  dinner  this  day  at  the  Archbifhops  table ,  his 
heart  and  thought  did  come  very  much  upon  ir,  &c. 

At  thefe  his  woids  Irejoyccdmuch  to  perceive  the  doing  of  the  Highcft,  in  the  hcarin"  of  his 
prayerfaithfully  prayed  &  ihatthe  anfwcrwhich  Iread  untohim  was  ibfilty  apply  cd  unto  his  prayer 
as  he  alio  himfelf,  did  perceive  with  great  comfort  and  fpirjtual  joy.  He  entreated  much  that  I  would 
pray  to  God  that  the  Empercur  might  be  rcfcorcd  to  the  favour  of  God,as  he  was  when  1  declared  my 
mellagc  unto  him  from  the  Higlicft,  1  aiifwered,  that  whaifoever  the  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth  fhould 
appoint  me  to  lay  or  do  unto  his  Majefty  ,  I  mofc  willingly  rejoyce  in  the  faithful  doing  o*-  it :  and 
that  it  was  my  duty  (asa  Chrj/hai')  topray  for  hisMajcfty  :  but  I  fliould  not  make  my  promifeof 
my  prayer  to  be  heard,  but  would  hi^-hly  rejoyce  if  his  Imperial  Majelfy  would  fo  ufe  himfelf  in  God 
his  judgment,  as  might  be  meriiorK  us  m  the  fight  of  oui  Redeemer. 

Such  words  and  matters  as  this  padcdbetwtcn  us.  And  he  fa  id  that  he  would  in  all  points,  fulirl 
i^otum  &pro.  the  advice  and  warning  of  God,  in  this  Adion  cxpreffcd,&  would  marry  a  Maiden  as  he  was  willed. 
mi(fum  Wil-  And  this  day  did  acknowledge,  &  account  himfelf  a  happy  man.  And  as  concerning  our  mutual  bond 
^'/I'c-'/'i!'?' '  ^^  ''^^  mtanes  ot  each  being  given  to  the  other  by  God  of  Heaven  and  haith,  he  vowed  and  promifed 
htmiie!^"   "'   ^'"^  he  would  regard  Km  all  points  tothc  bcft  of  his  skiland  power,  &c. 

Thele  and  other  luch  good  I'eeds  for  the  feivice  of  God  being  fown  between  us;  he  went  towards  his 
1  alace  in  the  Court ,  aad  1  to  the  vv'ater-fide,  and  fo  over  to  the  Coach  awaiting  for  me,  and  fo  came 
home.  God  be  prayfed, 

MEMO- 


(o>f  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  ABions,mthffmts,  &c.     4 17 


MEMORANDUM. 

The  Lord  Rofenherg  fcnt  Mr.  Jttcolf  (.MeKfchil^Wizh  this  Letter  unto  me. 

'Mngnifcu  Domino  Joanni  Dee  ad  mantis  proprks. 
^  tSKddgmjice  Bomine^VaterObfervandds&CharijJjm^. 

T  Etatusfumin  hisquimihidixiftis.  Cognovi  enim  quoniam  exaudivit  deprecatiorem  meaci  pi" 
■*^us  pater  &  mifericors  Dominus.  Itaque  maximo  pere  dcfiJeravi  ut  qyam  lepifTime  ea  mihi  legc- 
rc,  perlcgere  &  Temper  ab  oculos  habere  poflim  :  per  amoreni  Dei  oro  •  ut  faltem  eorum ,  qui  mihi 
perle<^a&  ad  me  pertinent  vcrborum  mihi  tranfmittas  dcfctiptioncm  :  Nontantiim  mihi  muhura 
gratificabi:ur,  led  &  conlolabor  plurimum, 

Obfccro  priterea  Dominmn  vellram,  alFidue  pro  me  orarc  velit ,  utconfirmet  hoc  Deus  quod  o- 
peratus eft  in  nobis  :  Sidirigat  omnia  confilia, opera, adioncs,  imuio  &  cogitationes  notiras  ad 
laudem  &  gloriam  fani^ilTimi  noftrisTui ,  commodum  multonim,  &  animx  noftrae  lalutem.  Neque 
definat,  pro  amore  fuo  paterno,  quo  me  (uti  fpcro)  Dominatio  vc(tra  proiequitur  me ,  I'emperin 
omnibus  quae  prohonorc  Dei  &commodo  veHroame  fieri  ScdebentScpoffunt,  admonere&  fioni- 
ficare.  Remfummopcre  mihigratum&expcftationi  meidignam  &  conlentancam  faciet.  Etcum 
his,  me  commendo  luis  prascibus  &:  orationibus,  rec  non  paterno  fuo  amori  3c  cordi.  Optim^  vale~ 
atMagnifica  Dominatio  veHra  Dominica  ,Cantate,  ^nno  1 585. 


Filius  &  Amicus  veftcr  ex  animo 

yyHhelmut  %^  ManU  propria. 


"B^go  ut  melius  intelligat  'Vomtnatio  vejtrtt 
edtjfte  fcripta  fu»t>  &  conjlderetflus  mtntem 
tneum  cjuam  verba-  Q^xia  miht  in  uft  mn  fiiit  a 
mnltis  annis  LinguA  Ldtina  j  (^  nemini  in  hAt 
re  cofifidere  volo- 


NOTE. 

I  had  tranflated  this  Sun'day  morning  ,  the  fame  parcel  of  the  former  Aflion  into  Latin  for  thfi 
Lord  Rofenberg ,  which  he  then  fcnt  for ,  jump  at  the  time  ,  when  1  had  finifhcd  it :  And  fo  I 
fen:  it  him  inclofed  in  a  Letter. 

LMay  6.  Being  Tuejday,  I  entred  my  Journey  tovvard  Valkenavf  Glaffc-houfc ,  and  Leiffig 
LMart. 

There  are  divers  Valkenaxvs  ,  one  by  Egrcy  or  ElhegeH^  not  far  from  Carls  Bath,  weftward  firotn 
Trage  about  1 8  Bemi[h  miles  ,  an  other  in  Behem  ,  about  1 1  or  1 2  miles  from  Tragc,  northerly,  a 
mile  from  Krehit^,  and  two  miles  from  Liep,  and  a  mile  from  KAmnitx^. 


NOTE. 


May  II  I  came  to  Leip^^,  on  Sunday  the  li  ol  M^J  •>  and  was  at  Peter  Hans  SvfArtz  Wis 
Houfe  lodged.  I  found  Lafire>3ceOverto»  ,  (with  much  ado}  an  Englifti  Merchant:  to  whom  my 
wife  (the  laft  year)  had  iTicwcd  no  htde  friendflup  to  himfelf ,  and  Thomoi  his  partners  fervant ,  in 
the  time  of  his  lying  (ick  incur  Houfe,  &c.  zt  Prage  ;  He  came  from  England  at  Mid-lent  ,  he 
conic  ffed  that  f<i»»o;ji5/ my  icTvant  had  been  oftentimes  with  him,  at  his  Houfe,  and  that  he  did 
think  that  he  would  come  with  the  next  Ships  after  his  comming  ftomEugUfdj  then  to  come  within 
16  dayes. 

I  perceived  by  his  diverfe  exprefle  fayings ,  that  he  was  but  a  hollow  friend  unto  me  ,  and  feemed 
'  half  afraid  to  deal  either  with  me,  or  my  man. 

There,  alio  I  found  a  courteous  Gentlerpan  called  Mr.Francis  Evers.ih:  Lord  Evers  his  Sortne  of 
the  North.  And  of  ali  other  matters  omitting  the  rehearfal  in  thefe  Records ,  (thole  matters  I  mean 
which  ziLeipJich  and  in  this  Journey  happened  notably  unto  ma,  orldid  myfelf)  one  Letter 
which  I  wrote  to  the  Queen  of  EngUndhei  Secretary,  the-Right  Honourable  Sii F'^ancis  jyal^ng'^ 
ham^  asfoUowethi 

Kight 


4"i  i     (?-v^  ^^«^  RelitionofDt.  Dec  ^ix  AQiQnSyWitbfpriUy&i^^ 

Jl/e«^  Honorable  SIR.  .   .    -^v*  ^    . 

ALbcit  I  have  (almoft)  in  vain  come  a  hundred  miles  i(rj:oin 
Frage  to  this  Leipfich  Mart)  hoping  either  to  meet  my  Servant 
there,  with  anrwei"  to  riiy  former  Letters,  fent  in  Noi>emher 
laft  to  her  Ma jefty  (when  alfo  l  wrote  unto  your  Honor,  and  divers 
other).  And  fo  with  Ipced  from  this  Lt'/j>//<:/j  to  have  fent  agaiq, 
moft  fpeedily  as  occafion  iTiould  have  ferved.  And  now,  I  find,  iieji- 
thiir  fervant,  neither  Letter  from  him,  neither  word  of  mouth  :  yet 
all  this  notwithftanding  :  and  whatfoever   the   hindrance  or  dela^ 
hereof  be  (whether  the  keeping  back  of  my  Letters  from  her  Msl^ 
jefty,  or  the  manifold  and  importune,  moft  weighty  affairs  publick 
hindrin^or  delaying  her  Majefties  moft  gracious ,  difcreet  and  w;fc 
fefolution  herein  :  or  what  other  occafion  elfe  hath  and  doth  caufq 
this  long  and  wonderful  delay  of  anfwer  receiving.    All  this  not-j 
withftandin^,  1  thought  good,  before  I  let  up  to  my  Coach,  to  vi-^ 
Citl  and  moft  humbly  to  falute  your  Honour  very  faithfully,  dutiful- 
ly and  fincercly,   with  great  and  the  fame  good  will  ,  that  my  l^cpp, 
ter^^"foine'''yeers  fince  written   to  your   Honour  ,   (butt  hen,,  .,4j 
ftnmbling  block  unto  your  Honour  and  other  ,   for  the  ftrang- 
neflb  of  the  Phrafes  therein  )  doth  pretend,  fo  it  is,  right  Honoura-^ 
ble,  that  the  merciful  providence  of  the  Higheft  ,  declared  in  his, 
great  and  abundant  graces  upon  me,  and  mine,  is  fo  wonderful  and 
mighty,  that  very  few,  unleife  they  be  prefent  witneffesjcan  believe- 
the  lame.  Therefore  how  hard  they  are  to  be  believed,  there  where, 
all  my  life  and  doin2;s  were  conftrued  to  a  contrary  fenfe  :   and^ 
procelfc  of  death  contrived  and  decreed  againft  the  Innocent^  wbo^^ 
can  not  eafily  judg.     ^^_  _,;^;^ 

1  am  forced  to  be  brief.  That  which  England [u(^e^ed,  was  alio 
here,  for  thefe  two  yeers,  almoft  (fecretly)  in  doubt,  in  queft-ion, 
in  confiiltation  Imperial  and  Royal ,  by  Honourable  Efpics,  fawn- 
ing about  me,  and  by  other,  difcourfed  upon,,  pryed  and  peered 
into.'  And  at  length,  both  the  chief  Romifli  power  3   and  Imperial 
dignity,  are  brought  to  that  point,  refolutely,  that ,  partly  they  are 
iorry^  of  their  fo  late  reclaiming  their  erroneous  judgment  againft 
U5  and  of  us ,   and  feek  means  to  deal  with  us,  fo  as  wee  might  fa- 
vour both  the  one  and  the  other  :  And  partly  to  Rome  is  fent  for  a? 
great  Authority  and  Power  as  can  be  deviled,  and  likewife  here,  all 
other  means  andwayes  contrived,  How,  by  force,  or  for  feare,they 
may^'inake  us  glad  to  follow  their  humours.   But  ail  in  vain  ,  .for, 
force  humane  we  fear  not :  as  plainly,  and  often,  1  have  to  the  Prin-  / 
ces  declared  :  And  otherwife  then  in  pure  verity,  and  godlineiTe,  wc  ■ 
will  not  favour  any  (my  words  may  fecm  very  marvellous  in  your  , 
Honours  ears :  But  mark  the  end  ,   wee  have  had  (and  (hall  have  to 
di^altwith  no  babes)  I  have  full  oft  and  upon  many  of  their  requefts 

and 


~^Atrtie  r  elation  o/Dr.Dec  bis  j^&iom.mthflirifs,  &c,     4I 


5 


and  queftions ,  referred  my  felf  to  her  Majefties  ani\ver  ,  thus,  in 
vain,  expeded.  Nuncifus  Jpofiolicn-s  ,  (Gcrmanicm  Mala  Spina) 
after  his  yeers  fuit  unto  me  to  be  acquainted  with  me,  at  Iciigth  had 
fuch  his  anfwer,  that  he  is  gone  to  Komc  with  a  flea  in  hi?  eare,  that 
diquieteth  him,  he  terrifieth  the  whole  State  Romifh  and  Jeluitical: 
fecretly  they  threaten  us  violent  death,  and  openly  they  fawn  upon 
ds.  We  know,  the  Aing  of  Envy,  and  tl^e  fury  of  the  Fear  in  Ty- 
tannical  minds  ,  what  defperate  attempts  they  have  and  do  often 
undertake.  But  the  God  of  Heaven  and  Earth  is  our  Li  jhtXeader^ 
•and  Defender.  To  the  Worlds  end,  his  mercies  upon  us,  will  bread 
his  Praifes,  Honour  and  Glory.  Thus  much  very  rhapfodically,  (yet 
faithfully)  tan^itam  diBitm  Japientz,  I  thought  good  to  commit  to 
thefafeandfpeedy  conveyance  of  a  young  Merchant  here  called 
Lawrence  Oi>erton  :  which  if  it  come  to  your  Honours  hands  be- 
fore my  Servant  have  his  difpatch,!  (hall  or  may  by  your  Honour  be 
■jtdvcrtized.  Your  Honour  is  fufficient  from  her  Ma  jefty  to  deal  and 
proceed  With  me,  if  it  be  thought  good.  But  if  you  make  a  Coun- 
cil-Table Cafe  of  it,  Ojiot  homines,  tot  fententix.  And  my  Coraif- 
fion  from  above  is  not  lo  large  :  Qjti  poteji  capere^  capiat. 

Sir,  I  truft,  I  fhall  have  Jufcice  for  my  Houfe ,  Library  ,  Goods, 
and  Revenues,  &c.  Do  not  you  difdain,  neither  fear  to  bear  favour 
liinto  your  poor  Innocent  Neighbour.  If  you  fend  unto  me  Mafter 
Thomas  Diggs  ,  in  her  Majcfties  behalf ,  his  faithfulnefle  to  her 
^ajefty ,  and  my  well  liking  o-f  the  man  ,  (hall  bring  forth  fomc 
ifncce  of  good  fervice.    But  her  Ma  jefty  had  been  better ,  to  have 
fpent  or  giVeh  away  in  Alms  ,  a  Million  of  Gold  ,   then  to  have 
loji  fame  opportunities  paji.  No  humane  reafon  can  limit  or  deter- 
mine God  his  marvellous  means  of  proceeding  with  us.  Hee  hath 
made  of  Sitnl  (E  K.}  a  Fanl :  but  yet,  now  and  then,  vifited  with 
a  pang  of  humane  frailty.  The  Almighty  blefle  her  Majefty  both 
in  this  World,  and  eternally  :  and  infpire  your  heart  with  fome  con- 
ceiving of  his  mercilul  purpofes,  yet,  yet,  not  utterly  cut  ojfFfrom 
her  Majefty,  to  en)oy 

i  From  Leij^fich  this  i^of  May  1 58^, 

-bTUv.r.  at  Peter  Hans  S warts  Houfe. 

,>^\;t;  .      Xpnr  Honours  faithful  wel-wiUer  to  ufe  and 

_  .  ."^'i' ^  command  for  the  honour  9f  God  and  her 

m  •  >-      Majejiief  hefi  fer^^ice^ 

1  -  v>      ::::or7  JOHN    DEE. 

*To  the  right  Honourable  Sir  Francifr 
Wallmgham  Kmght  ■,  hermoji  ExieHeftf 
Majejiies  Trincipsd  Secretary ^  m^  fmguUr 
good  Friend  and.F.^\rqny^,Xi\,^.;, 


4 14     ^-^  ^^^^  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABiovs^opitbfpritSi^c, 
lUuflriff.  &-  Magnif,  D.  mei  Colendijfmt. 

Encdi^lio  Dei  Patris  &  mera  gratia  &  mifericordia  per  unicum 
Imeritum  Jei'u  Chrifti ,  illuminatio  Spiritus  San£i:i ,  conhrmet 
nos  cum  omnibus  Chriftianis,  qui  magno  cumzelo  ,  propter 
gloriam  ejus ,  cruccm  ,  tribulationcm  ,•  &  praefentionem  a  ranci- 
do  atque  putido  Icorto  Bahylonico  ^  in  turbulentiffimo  hu jus  mundi 
Oceano  patimur  ,  ut  excmplo  Jtlu  "Chrifti  qui  eft  in  Patre  ,  virtu- 
te  &  auxilio  Spiritu  S!  hjec  omnia  perferre  patienter  valeamus  ad 
nominib  liii  eloriam  Sc  animarum  noftrarum  lakitem.  Amen. 

Mirum  fortaflis  videbitur  Dominat  V.  quod  ignotus  ad  ignotos 
fcribo  imputabitis  bonam  hujus  culpx  partem  juftiilimo  dolori, 
quern  ex  rumore  Ipaiio,  &adme  delato  propter  D.  V.  concepi : 
mirari  enim  non  Talis  poil'um  pertinax  ftudium  beftix  iftius  Babilo- 
nice ,  qux  nihil  intentatum  relinquit,  nullum  non  movendo  lapi- 
dem ,  quo  hominibus  vcftraj  nationii'  prsecipue  piis  &  amantibus  i 
Dei  noa  folummodo  nocere  fed  &  funditus  perdere  ftudet.  Elapfo 
enim  undecima  die  hujus  mentis  Legatus  Pontiticius  Libellum  ftip-  ' 
plicationum  ut  vocant)  Ca;f.  Majeftati  obtuht  quo  D.V,  Nicroman-  |  ( 
cise  &:  ahis  artibus,  prohibitisinliuiulat ,  ahifque  calumniis  graviter  ' 
accuiat  copias  hu)us  hbelli  habere  potuiflem  ,  fed  nimis  fero  hac  dc  ^ 
re  ftim  certior  fadus,  ncc  tutum  &:  abfque  fufpitione  eft  qui  ilium  ex  ^ 
Italico  in  Latinum  fermonem  tranftuht  petere.  Quare  c^in  hgec  t 
omnia  vana  a  p.  K  ut  hominibus  Chriftianis  &  Philofophjs^  certo  J 
fciam  Epiftolam  hanc  cum  tenendi  turn  admonendi  c^uta  exararc  j 
libuit  ut  promptiores  &  paratiores  JD.  V.  ad  jelpondendum  ofFeh-  n 
dant.  Pcto  itaquc  ut  co  an|mo  fufcipiatis  quo  fcripta!  eft  fcilicet  ( 
Chriftiano  integro  &  candidQ.Valet€  meque  preeibus  veftris  Chrifto  ( 
commcndate. 

Ante  aliquot  dies  tranfmifijjem  D.V,  hitteras  fed  D.  ^.,\   .,.  ;H^ 

V.peregrx  profeSias  cffe  mihi  fgnificatnm  fiiitpofi'    'j^Wty,  fl 

quam  antcm  a  fer'vitore generofo  D.a  Bikeifiem  cog-  Hd' 

nofiffem  (Ferdinand©  Harnik)  D.V.  banc  noftram  re-  flS 

Miffe  patriamjintcrmittere  nonpotm  qiiin  illnd  quod   Julius  Afcanius/*;-  l|^^ 
'vejirum  inter effit  Jcire  litteris  tjiis  fignificarem.  ^'""^ ''  V^deman.   1 5 

llluftriir.  &  Ma^nif.  .D.  Joanni  Dee  8c 
hdwardo  F,  &:c.  Dominis  &  amicis 

meis  colendiflTotiCil   ti?.    "l .  .ti  iHtii«<iH   v.ljjvt    -jc*. 
Rceived  of  Mr.  Kelly  on  Friday  before  Whir- 


0 


G  •  Ix  I 


L 


f( 


•>•'-<'; 


funday,  after, my  return  from  F^i/j^ew^n?.  i^S'^il^'^-^-'^'^  "^-^i; 
Mr.  if e//y  received  this  on  Thurfday  before'-^'  \5^.'jii  i 
Whitfontide,  2'i  May  i^fiC.  i^v.      dU'. 

^  lUnJirif-^ 


($^tme  Relation  ofDr,  Dee  bis  ABions^  JPithjpirifSyScc,   415 


Illnftriffiffio  Principi  id>'  Domino  Domino  Wilielmo  Uifino  heredi- 
tar  to  Domino  Indite  Domm  a  Rofenberg,  Domino  in  Grommavv 
Equiti  anrei  'Z/ellerijCx[3ivex  Majejlatu  intimi  confihi  Conjiliario^ 
(^  in  Regno  Bohcmix  fnprcmo  Bitrgra'z^io,  (^c.  Domino  ^  Pa>^ 
trono  mco  Colendijjimo. 

ILlnftridlmc  Piinceps  ,  nihil  mihi  gratias  a  Magnifico  Domino, 
Schonbcrgio  narr ari  potcrau,quam  vcftram  Celficudinem  prolpera 
interim  frui  valetudine  ,  Dum  ego  vaiio,  diverfo,  Sc  intricato 
quodam  fueram  ja£iatus  itincre,  per  montes,  per  valles  ,  per  fylvas 
denfiHimas,  per  apertos  campos,  &:  per  nivem  profundam,  &:  nobis 
fere  inperviam  :  Et  (temper  tamen  nos  protegente  altiillmo)  tan- 
dem fani  ,  falviqiie  illefis  tarn  cquis  quam  curru  Celfitudinis  ve- 
ftrse  ,  reverfi  lumus.  Pro  quo  profpero  luccefluj  fummas  Altiflimo 
agimus  gratias,  8c  .Veftrae  Cellitudini  mfinitas  a  nobis  deberi  fate- 
mur.  Dum  abium  contra  nos  nefcio  quid  falfi  incipit  jfte  ApoUolicus 
Nnncim  vel  leviter  nimiii  credere,  &tcmere  conqueri,  vel  a  feipfo 
excogitare  pervcrfx.  Vers  fi  ita  pcrgant(habito  jam  noftri^pcr  bien- 
nium  experimento  fatis  accurato)iIli  quidemjqui  pietate&  fapientia, 
(faltem  vulgares)  deberent  fuperarc  homines  omnes,  omnium  homi- 
num  femet  declarare  maxime  invidos,  malitiofoSjperverfos/anguinis 
humani  appetentes  ,  fuperbos ,  innocentum  carnitices,  Sc  piorum  in 
Chiifto  Calumniatores  exitioibs,&:c.Vere  (dico)  cogemur  pulverera 
ex  calceis  noftris  excntere,  &  alias  in  mundi  partes  nos  conferre.  Et 
nifi  veftrx  Celfitudinis  haberemus  eam  quam  debemns  confiderati- 
onem  :  Et  nifi  nos  iplos  veftrx  Celfitudmis  praefidio  quocunqne  ar- 
mato  (quafi)  minntos  exiftimaremns  (  prater  illud  invincibile ,  Dei 
Opt.Max.  agmcn  invifibile)  ftatim  abire  ex  hoc  regno  conarcmun 
Curare  etiam  debet  (ua.Cxfarea  Majeftas,  ut  aliquo  modo,  Sc  citif- 
fime,perrpedum  toti  huic  Regno  effe  poffit^nos  duos  non  folum  vera; 
Catholicos  efle,fed  ctiam  verae  pietatis  &  pacis  ChriftiangCjefle  aman- 
tidlmos.  Per  literas  iiias  non  eft  opus  ut  plura  efFundam,  fpiritus  mei 
fervore  quodam.  SeddiligentiiFime  &  circumfpediflTime  refpiciamus 
nos  utrique,  meftimabile  Dei^quod  nobis  utrifque  contulit  Donum. 
Sumus  enim  quafi  tres.  Scd  in  uno  Deo5unus  quafi  vir  efle  debemus. 
Myfterium  hoc  notate  I.  D.  E.  K.  W.  R.  Nam  qui  me  habet,  habet 
Sc  E.  K.  Sc  quern  ego  meum  habeo,  ille  etiam  ipfius  mei£.iC.  cen- 
fendus  eft  effe.  Omnipotens  ille  Deus  qui  cunfta  creavit,  veftram  II- 
luftrilTimam  Celfitudinemi  fuse  divinse  Juftiti3e,8<:  Glorias  Comimni- 
ftrum  Sc  co-operatorem  nobis  con)ungat  Sc  diutiflime  confervet. 

Pragx,  Maii  a6j  Anno  158(5. 

lUitjiriJlpme  Celfitudinis  <vejlrxjidelif' 
fimm  in  Chrifto  Seri>itor. 
-,  Joannes  Dee. 

^  ■•  Kk 


412. 


^J^  truer  damn  ofDu  Dee  his  JElionSy  mtbjpirits,8^c. 


InfiSiiJpmx  Totentiffimeque  facrx  fux  Caefareac  Majejiati 
Hungaiise,  Bohemia,  C^c.  Kegi,  d^c.  (^c. 

P|Er  aliquot  )am  hebdomadas  ,  Invi^liffime  &:  Gratiofifllme  Cae- 
fary  aures  noftras  circunifonabant  riimores  vaiii,  quafdam  con- 
tra me,  &:  Ibcium  meum,  prxparari  accufationes  graves  &  ex- 
itioias ;  Veftra^que  Sacrje  Cxjarex  Ma)eflati  ofFerendas  fore  vel  jam 
oblatas  clfe  :  Et  prseterea  Sacram  Veftram  Cxfaream  Majeftatem, 
quorundam  perfuafionibus,poene  eo  perdudani  effe,  ut  aliquam  ma- 
lam,  &nobis  periculofam,de  nobis  conciperet  opinionem.Veftrae  igi- 
tur  Sacrx  Cxfarex  Majeftati  humillime  ibpplicamus  ut  (Authorita- 
te  lua  CsE/.ne^,interpo{ita(illius,cu)ufcunque  contra  nos  exhibit!  li- 
belli,  copiam,  accurate  &  verbatim  exfcribi,  nobilque  tradi,manda- 
re,gratiole  dignaretur,Sic  enim  noftris  refponfis  adaccufationis  con- 
tra nos  coniidx  collatis  articulos,  citiffime  Sc  clariffime  intelliget  fua 
Sacra  Ma)cftas  Cxfarea,  quid  in  prxmiffis,  cum  Juftitia,  ad  Dei  ho- 
norem  &  Rcipublicx  Chudhnx  utilitatem  ,  arbitrari,  vel  ftatuere 
pofllt  aut  debcat.  Et  de  hoc  certifllmi  nos  fumus,favente  Deo,(quod 
adhuc,  ct  nimis  diu,  aliquorum  negligentia  ,  et  contra  noftram  vo- 
luntatem,  Veftram  Sacram  Cxjavem  latet  Majeftatem.)  Nos  cum 
VeftratSacrje  Cxfarex  Ma)eftatis  perfonae ,  turn  Reipublicae  Chri- 
ftianx,  per  Vos  longe  utiliores,  gratiorefque  effe  poflbjquam  omnes, 
et  quotcunque  hie  noftri  praefentes  adverfarii  :  vcluti  ipfa  docebit 
Veritas  fi  poenesVeftrae  Cxfarex  Majcftatis  aures  proprias,eum  poffit 
habere  favorem ,  ut  gratiofe  audiri  queat  Deus  Opt.  Max.Sacrara 
Veftram  Cxfaream  Majeftatem  fua  Divina  abundantiflime  illuftret 
gratia  abrachioque  fuo  extento,  contra,  Chrifti  atrocillimos  hoftes 
Imperatorem  reddat  triumuphantilTimum 

Amen. 
• 

Mail  2S,  1586 

Sacrx  Vefirx  Majejiatis 

Caefareae 
Hnmilis  ^  jidelis  Seri^itor, 
adVeifromo'vendamgloriam 

Joannes  Dec» 
Jn'i'iSiijpmx  potentijjemeqne  Sacrx  fux  Caefareae 
Majejiate  Hungariae,  Bohemix,  (^c.Kegi,  d>c.  ^c. 
Domino  meo  CUmentiffimo  ^  Fatroiio  incomparabili 

ad  manns  proprias 
^       expeditijjime 

Bdhr 


(tj^true  9\elatm  ofJ^r,  Dee  bis  A&mr,  mthj^irirs,  &e.   4 17 


EDlor  goflronger  lirbor  bortraitter  fraiindtj^ifeflnmcloifl:  mir  claf-x, 
brtifjlainjtt  i^omon^Darauf'z.ichnnt  fondon  fronclron  Gottesdionop 
behoriit  ganuott'vornomany    In  fnmma  craf'x,   Dwvid  fraibt 
ift  rvaar  ,  Mirabilis  Deus  in  fan£lis  fuis  Deus  liVacI ,  ipfe  dabic 
virtutem  &  fortitudinem  plcbi  fuae,  Benedidus  Deus. 

Difo  Vitrfolgiing  wirds  Inon ,   (obgottcoill)  In  Iror  wolf  art  oor-^ 
richon  und  don  Lonidon  In  Irom  fpot. 

Dentibus  fuis  frement  ,    &  contabefcent  deliderium  peccato- 
rum  pcribit. 

Dom  gtitton  Jimgon  Gorrn  Ci'viUor  got  foinrm  horrn  'vndficjfolbjl: 
orl\pnam.^  J{an  afn  foel'vnd  Crib  gohol^ontvordon.  Daf-z.  Vborig 
crollen  coir  cHmtadtlich  brld  Vorrichton  ,  Interim  ,  So  brotts  Ichj 
fic  bon  moiu  ^  angon  ,  Jnm  fermindtlichjion  Jnbo  grnojpn ,  ^a- 
diirim  trouots  graiicott  Ina^  Juofforirof/^  Darbinbcgott  Jljimt  i/nf'i, 
Von  Nanafa  In  arigk^iiL 

Datum  inEyle  Kaudmit'z,  don  2^  Maii,  Anno  1586* 


Des  form  trrnoer 
fraitndt 


Wilfclm  Moimaigne  handfz* 


Horrn  Lafpar  mn  Schonbnrg  attff   Foplifx.  Uoinom  Vartranotrd 
gutton  froimdo  In  folbjihandog. 


Cito 
Cito 
Cito 
Cito 
Cito 


K  k  ft  Sowdet 


4 1 8       ^  true  relatm  c/Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  la^ith  joints  Jkc, 


■^ 


SOrvder  Kumefchenn  Kayferlichen  auch  Jh  Hungern  nflds3e* 
horn  Koninhchon  Mapt  i/nfors^  allor  guadigjion  horrn  cropen 
DoBori  Joanni  de  Dee  Engellandorn  ,  anformoldon  ,  D<«/x. 
Iro  Mapt  jaufru,  jondorn  'vrgeblkhcn  ,  bodenckjichon  *vndt  hilli- 
chcn  I'rfacbonjont  fchlojj'on  fom  fno'vndt  dio  fomigon  In  Joror 
Mapt ,  tnnig  Kuch  Bohem  fo  woll  ah'  andorn  dorofolbrvn  Pomp 
Kanchofi ,  Inirjiant  gumbombon  i/ndt  Landon  longer  nicht  Induldon 
nach  jidugiifn  Hiordtiff  fo  fun  nun  Jorar  Mapt  Endlichor  orille 
i>ndt  tnijler  heurhlich  Daf'Xj  chrfichjambt  foinom  Worbe  tindorn, 
q;mdalloti  don  foyinpeHy  fo  rvoU  als  foinem  Conforten  <vndt  Jugetha- 
nen  boy  <vormedanp  Iron  Mapt  tritjien  <vfinachl'uf'z>lichenn  jira^and 
'vngiiad ,  Innerhali  dm  Negt  nachoniandor  <yolpomdon  fechs  Z/agen, 
alhie  or  hcve  ,  fund  fichalf'x.balet  daranff'  'vrn  hinnon  ,  anfforhalbge- 
dachtor  Jorar  Mapt  Koningraich  Behannb  ^vnis  andoror  Joror  Mapt  ' 
Koningj^aich  ,  Curfianthtimbay  <vndt  Cainder  begebo  dijeilben  Dnr-^ 
chanf'x,  Jiin  KuJtJ^tigmedr  'Nucbfufforror  Danimenjiveyternicht  be" 
fufiden  nach  betrejien  laffe  Davtit  auf-x,  den  lafll  laffalba  'vn  Into  a- 
dar  den  feympen  auch  doiipy  Jnie  Jupethaury^  'vngrhorfamblicfay  v 
horganpen  croiirdo  Irr  Mapt  Inn  trujion  einfchon  'vndt  Stra^\  fofie 
lirber  i/ormitton  fchont/roltoft  nicet  Vernrfacht  tpordoun  ,  Wolton  In 
Mapty  Ime  Juondtlicher  Nachrkhtung  ,  mcbt  porgen.  Ef-z.  bofz.fefe 
attch  Hie  ran  Iror  Mapt  foruftor  Willey  fvndt  mainug.  Decretum'in 
Confilio  Imperatorix  Majeftatis  fecretiori.  Pragc  xxix  Maii ,  flnno 
Lxxxi/i. 

E.  Waldtnons  Sayleldt. 


Mynflhik. 


Dacret  DoSior  Johann  de  Dee  Iror  Mapt  Koniglich  Bohomh  fo  woU 
als  andors  Iror  Mapt  Lander  ftreamboy. 

DoBori  Joanni  Dec 
offerendnm 

I  recei'ved  this  the  30  day  of  Msiy,        * 
Anno  i  58*55  Mane  hora  nona^ 
By  one  of  the  Chancery  Clerks, 

The  Copie  of  the  Emperonr  his  Decree ,  of  our  Banifhment 
out  of  his  KingdomeSy  Dnh^doms^  ^c,  with  onelyftx  dayes 
warning. 


^trnereUtm  of  Dr.Dte  bis  ABiom,mthffirits,  &b     429 


aXfino  1586  18  Jn»i(  wErphurdia  Thuringix,  (jnoy  lilHjhiJftmut  Dominm  Kokuhtx"\\x% 
wi/ifrrff  JoannemCarpioncnKrJ  «w  ,  cum  Uteris  fuis,  (^  maxime  ttt  de  uxorefrttnya  ^  Deiin- 
telligeretvolHntatfm^    &de alitsre(;ns-,&c.    Egovero  jamCzKd\xeraminHc?L\3.  y  C^  Erphiir- 
dix  erat  D.Edn^idoYitkus.  ^iiifuper  quafliomhm  &   petitiomifalHafirtjfu^ijufuseratdivi- 
nitus  Chartam  mftadam  fttpcr  Alt  are ,  ante  Sacerdotem    Miffarn  celehrantem  ponere  ■,  auod  &  /\ 
fecit,  0fiM  &  die  fttpra  fcriptis  ,  mur.e  i»  LMonaflfrio}A\nov\sOrdims  S.  Francifci ,  jar^r /wr^w  Admoniiio. 
6&q  Monacho  Setitort  Mijfam  Celebrame.  €t  fimta  Afifa ,  h<ec  qu£  feqmtur  in  Charta  invenie- 
bantur  pulchre  fcripta.  Sed  die  feijueme ,  pofiejuam  exfcrtpta  erant  pro  Illuftytffimo  Tiincipe  Tempore  exird 
fiatim  gvanneri  or»nes4ine£  &  liter*,  nihilqne  tntlla  (^harta,  pofl  vifthle  permaujit  &c.  tiejlri. 

Nations  ten aeomnes  vocatae  in  Judicium,  coram  Tribunal  fiabunt.  Populus  enim  rebcllis) 
nJmiumque  hujus  mundidcditusvoluptati,  meijamdudum  ira  fuioiis  irricitus  tabefcic :  Itaquod, 
neque  ad  (iniliram  neque  ad  dextram  led  ad  voluiitatem  mcam  perinplendam ,  declinandum  eft. 
Beacus  ilk  qui  mihi  maadatilquc  pa:i is  inei  obediens  eft  &  perleverantia  dccoratus, 

Maledidlusautem,  qui  mendax  opcribus ,  pcrdicas  verLum  meum  :  quia  I'candalo  mulcis  erir, 
&  ignomtnis  p"cis  Evangelu  mci. 

tgote  ^«/fWOTf(  quia  manusadjunxifti  mihi)  Davidem  zdColtatha  jugulandumconftituijc 
coiiltuuendo  invexi. 

Mundaigituradgloriammcamutcrc  ,  &corpi:stuum  erigc  in  me,ad  juftitiammeam  in  fede  de- 
bica coUocaiidam ,  &iupeibiam  iniquifTimatn  turpiflimamque  (illorumqui  pofucruntfedcmmeam  , 
in  fcabelLim  pedem  blalphcmia:  &  abominationis  )  ad  penitus  turn  conculcandum ,  turn  eradi- 
candam. 

Beams  enim  eris  in  fordtudine  manus  &  fpiritus  mei,quia  audite  preces  tuas.  Noli  igitur  tempftt 
viptationis  tu£  negligere :  icd  fremezelo  &  indignatione  aceiima,  &  conjunftam  tuis  parietibus  , 
Tirgmcm  inuxoremaccipe  ,  paracam  lumbis  &  feiietftuti  tuae  illamque  amandodilige,  8c  diligcnio 
fove ,  ut  mea  in  te  &  in  ilia  benediditio  pollicita  manifcfta  fiat. 

CaVeporro,  nequostibimauxilium  paravi ,  feivos  meos,  velnegligentia  veltlmiditatetua, 
alioruir.  lie  panaris  ex  manibustuisveltanquamoves  ab  ovilituo,  malis  attibus  &  iniquicaitc,  eiipi, 
<2u»s  enim  irtud  lurripiet  quod  datum  dl  a  me  f 

Cogita  igitur  &  vigilando  cura  •,  quod  hadtenus  lefum  eft. 

Fnngarn  iiamque  trsnum  Satanz  &  inimicis  veftris. 

Benedi6tio  PaCris  &  Spiritus  mei ,  &  conlblatio  a  mc  (  cui  fubjeda  eft  omnis  poteftas )  fit  tecum 
8£  lupra  tc. 

A  peccatis  denique  monitus  ccffa  ut  cum  mecum  loqucris  ,  vita  tua  fit  luminc  8c  gratia  mca 
fufiuka. 


MEMORANDUM. 

Berememhredth^t  Mr.  Francis  Pucci  Florentine,  whom  at  mjr  going  to  Lt'ipGch  I  left  w  opir  .,    *  „,;, 
hfife  at  Prage  ,  in  the  meanefpaee  had  been  at  Frankford  upon  Mene  ,  awL  went  from  Prage  ahom  rpucd. 
the  fame  d^y  that  the  Bishop  of  Vhzzm^tinnc'vis  h\po^o\\cn%  dtA  exhibit  to  the  Emperom  a  Itbel  Amox^ti. 
ugainft  us  ofmefi  horrible  untruths,  &c.    At  his  going  from  Prage  he  had  that  Nuncius  bleffirtg^  Mm  e. 
&c.  In  the  meane  fpace ,  and  after  his  return  to  Prage  a^ainit  happened  fo^  that  the  lo  of  May 
lafi  I  I  received  the  Emperours  commandment ,  1 ,  my  Companion  ,  anii  all  mine  to  depart  within 
fix  dayesout  of^idiOzaudconfiqHentlyoHt  of  all  his  Kingdomes  ,  Dukedomes  and  Lands,   JVhich 
we  did ,  and  were  csme  to  Erphurd  in  Thuringa ,  tnd  femetimes  to  Caffcl  whether  we  had  rermvedi 
our  goods  and  family  by  reafon  the  Senators  o/Erphurd  wauldgive  at  no  leave  to  hire  any  honfe  there 
as  both  by  the  Lord  Schonberg  »»  the  name  of  the  Lord  Rolenberg,  Iwas  ajfayed,  with  repulft 
received  ,  and  alfo  again  by  me  and  E.  K.  proved^  July  7,  8,  p,  i  o,  1 1,  1 2,  i  J  j  I4»  Anion  Tuef- 
day  (  the  I'^thdayofjune)  T>aSlor  Cmiz  brought  upward  from  the  Stnat  that  they  would  not  grans 
our  Rrqneft-^yer  notwithjlandingiif  the  Lor  dV^Qiznh^xg  would  again  fend  unto  them  i»  the  matter  ^ 
they  would  ihtnk^better  upon  the  matter,  &c. 

Now  remember  that  Francis  Pucci  came  to  Erphurd  c«  Thurfday  after  lur  fupptr ,  July  10  (  ftilo 
novo)  on  horfe-back^on  a  horje  which  he  had  bought  at  Mawnberg-/<»/re,  ^c. 

July  the  nth  he  dtfcourfed  with  EtK.andme,  that  he  thought  we  might]  obtain  favour  to  re-' 
turn  to  Prage  agam  if  we  would. 

--  That  he  had  found  this  Nuncius  Apoftolicus  more  courteous  then  Malafpina  j  of  whom  he  reported 
alfoy  that  ts  was  credibly    informed  that  he  was  fore  offended  that  we  gave  him  no  more  honourable 
-   title  in  our  fpeec'  st  to  htm ,  then  ReverendifTiraa  Vcftra  Paternitas. 

This  Pucci  /)  -med  the  dtfcourfe  of  his  talkjo  perfwade  us  to  thinkwefl  of  this  Epifcopus  Placen- 
tius  that  he  was  charitsble  towards  us,  and  forrow  that  we  werefo  uucourteoufly  HJed,that  he  meant 
mthingelfe  inhtsftne  10  the Emperour again f  M^but that  wemightbe  examined ,  and rhoubdng 

found 


430     <o>^  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^witbj^iritSy^c. 

found  fanlty^  wejhonld  be  lent  to  Reme^  but  after  that  he  had  begiinto  move  againft  us,  that  he  found 
jhe  Emperour  more  eager Ij  bent  againft  us,  than  he  himfelt  was, 

N  or  S. 

The  Lord  ■2^/c»i'«'>'^told  us  that  when  he  did  (inourbehalf  )  advifethe  Emperour  of  his  error 
committed  in  our  extermination,  that  the  Emperour  anfwered'that  \!c\\i NHnctiu  from  his  firft 
Audience  did  urge  fo  vehemently  againRus,  and  alio  the  Pope  had  fen:  commandment  by  Let- 
ter to  him  to  deliver  us  and  fend  us  to  Fome  ,  that  he  was  forced  in  manncrto  do  as  he  did.  But 
jt  the  commandcmcnt  or  his  Decree  were  to  be  made  again,  that  it  fhould  not  pafl'e  >  or  if  this 
Nuncius  ,^p  .ftolicm  had  not  lent  this  Decree  away  to  R»me  ,  that  he  fhould  not  fend  itj&c.  This 
I  note  in  rcfpcd  of  the  contrariety  '\n\.\\z  Nhucim  aflcrtifon,  and  the  Emperours,  of  carlo  hard 
ufage. 

The  forcfaid  eleventh  day  of  July,  the  forefaid  fr./'«m  to  prove  this  his  intended  perfwafion 
of  the  Nufcini  good  meaning  toward  us,  and  to  make  us  beleeve  that  great  benefit  would  enfue  our 
going  to  Rome,  did  bring  forth  unto  us  a  writing  of  his  own  hand  which  he  read  unto  us ,  and  at  the 
hearing  of  it  we  muled  much  for  many  caulcs  1  asked  him  then  why  the  NHncius-  had  not  fublcri- 
bcd  this  writing.  It  is  all  one  faid  he  for  that  ;  Hath  he  heard  this  read  (quoth  1,)  yea,  that  he  hath 
heard  me  read  this  three  ieveial  times  t  arife  unto  him  (laid  he  ;  )  And  ifyou  like  of  it  laith  he, 
wherein  his  power  ferveth  hiin  not  to  performe  as  much  as  is  fpccified  in  the  writing  ,  he  will  make 
and  ufe  meancs'tohaveitfromhis  Holindfe;  well,  laid  I,  take  a  copy  hereof  Mr.  Kelly,  farlwas 
riding  toward  Salfeild  about  a  houfe  getting  ;  Thereupon  faid  he,  contented ,  but  I  thiak  it  meetcr 
to  lave  and  keep  the  original  it  ftlf  laid  £.  K,  Well,  laid  rucci ,  and  io  the  original  vvas  delivered 
to  B.  K, 

NOTE. 

After  10  of  the  clock  the  fame  Friday  ,  being  the  eleventh  day  of  this  moncth  ,  after  break-faft 
I  rid  toward  Sa/feild  about  the  houfe  ot  the  Earl  Jll/ert  of  Sw'Hrtz.enherg,  &t. 

But  after  1  was  out  of  £rjf«r<i  until  my  return  again,  I  was  fo  lore  vexed  in  mind  to  think  of 
Pucci  his  return  to  our  company  ,  as  well  for  his  unqniet  ngtHre  in  difptitations  3  as  for  his  blabbing 
A  bile  efourfecrets  nithout  our  leave,  or  well  Itkjng ,  or  a»y  good  doing  thereby;  m\\Qt  in  God  his  fer- 

viee  ,  or  our  credit,  but  rather  the  contrary,  enluing  albeit  not  ot  his  intent,  but  by  either  his  undjl- 
Afpie.  c'.eethandlingof  it,  or  of  his  undue  hearers  of  him,  8:c.    Andallofor  his  Houfhold  behaviour,  not 

•  acceptable  to  our  wives  and  family  ,  and  alfo  becaul'e  we  were  warned  thai  hefl^ould  be  eat  sfffrom 
our  company,&c.  And  chiefly,  now  to  conhdcr  that  he  had  laid /«c/)^^<i«  for  us  with  our  mortal 
enemy,  co  entrap  us  by  fair  fawning  words,  which  by  no  meancs  the  Emperour  would  confent  to  do 
before  by  his  authority  ,  but  rather  to  put  us  out  of  his  Kingdomes,  &c.  And  imagining  that  he  was 
a  mighty  Explorator  upon  us,  for  this  Nttncitts  sApofiolictu  -,   and  his  adherents,  that  now  he 
might  perceive  what  we  had  done  hitherto ,  what  we  were  doing,  and  what  we  intended  to  do, 
and  conlidcnng  that  he  urged  at  our  hands  in  anlwer  to  the  former  writing ,  wherein  alfo  lay  a  trap 
for  either  in  not  anfweving  it,  orrefufingto  grant  fome  points  of  it,  or  in  our  confenting  to  the 
whole ,  this  Naneim  would  put  matteragainlf  us  to  our  great  difadvantage.    Thus  being  tormented 
in  mind  in  my  abfcnce,how  we  might  be  rid  of  this  Vr>  Pucci^^  quiet  and  honefJ  meangs,!  devifed 
to  write  to  this  Nuncius  to  know  if  this  writing  were  of  hiscontriving  onely,  or  of /"xrc/his  contri- 
ving onely,or  joyncly,or  if  at  the  lealitHe  writing  were  according  to  his  will,and  oflcrumo  us,ardfo 
to  fend  him  away  ;  wherein  he  could  make  no  rcfulal,!  intending  not  to  make  him  privy  of  the  con- 
tent of  my  Letter ;    And  in  the  mean  (pace  of  his  abfcnce  I  hoped  that  fome  good  way  and  better 
meanes  woi'.ld  appear  or  fall  out ,  whereunto  we  might  trulV,&c.   Thus  I  note  my  imaginations  and 
dilcourfcs  in  the  time  of  mv  abience. 

I  returned  to  Erfhurd  July  i  3..  her  a  5.  a  meridie. 

I  found  Fr.  T/rec;  defirous  to  have  anlwer  to  the  forcfaid  writing  >  and  very  much  peifwading 
this  Roman  voyage  ,  ufing  arguments  out  ot  our  anions ,  as  that  God  laid  we  fhould  go  to  Rome, 
in  a  certain  monechs  fpace  ;  That  we  ought  to  obey  the  Roman  Bifhop,  and  to  love  him,  &c.    I  re- 
plycd  and  raiJ,that  he  was  not  to  urge  Godupon  any  hu  faymgs  to  «*,buttorcferre  all  to  his  moft  free 
dilpofition,  his  will  was  to  be  done  and  not  GUIS ,  God  was  not  bound  tous,&c.  He  anfwered  ve- 
ry vehemently ,  and  often,  that  T)eus  eft  nobis  obligatiffimus,  &  Dens  dixit  nos  tturcs  Romam,  e?* 
fgo  credt  &  cvedam,  &  aliter  non  credam  mflmiht  Detu  dixerit  m»  nobis,&c.    Well,  (quod  we) 
God  hath  delivered  unto  us  his  meaning  in  that  phrafe  ,  which  we  alfo  dcvifc  you  of,  that  it  is  not  ■ 
meant  (by  the  fpeech)  that  we  fliall  corporally  goe  to  Rome ,  and  fo  I  brake  ott  that  his  reafoning ; 
And  told  him  that  we  metvailcd  chat  he  flioulduige  this  Roman  Voiagc  fo  violently  and  eagerly 
more  then  we;  It  appertained  unto  us  as.Binch  as  to  bim,  ice.  The  fame  day  I  told  him  that  he  had 
heretofore  ofiended  God  with  his  curiojity  incur  ajfaires  ozhcrviife  then  appertained  unto  his  cal- 
ling, and  he  may  well  remember  his  repentance  therein ,  and  his  foigiveneffe  obteined,   But  that 

novf 


<^trHerelatimofI)rJ)tthisABionS:,wiihffmts,^c.     43S 


novv  he  had  oflfended  much  more  in  cuiiofity,  and  half  in  confpiracy  againli  us  vvi:h  ourmortrj 
enemy  this  N»»ciHs  ylpofialiciu  ,  upon  whoixihe  did  fawn,  in  whofe  favour  he  is  ,  wh  >  j  ynedi 
counfaileth  with  him  in  our  afttiires ,  who  dare  prefcribe  us  whar  we  have  to  do  in  fa  w.ighcy  af- 
faires as  our  Journey  to  R^'Wf,  whohach  framed  a  bill,  accufing  us  coufufcdly  of  HcrefiCj  and  wick- 
ed Magick  ,  both  falfely  in  one  pare ,  and  dangerous  to  life ,  and  infamous  a:  the  lea(t  in  the  otheri 
and  hereto  reqaircth,  urgcth,  and  in  manner  in  God  his  name  argnethby  our  a^T! ions  pafl,  obedi- 
ence.   And  therefore  he  hath  feparaced  himfelf  from  us,  and  hath  fee  himfclf  .ig.-iin(t  us,  &C. 

With  great  vehemency  he  laid ,  He  intended  nothing  ,  but  well  to  us ,  and  tvas  Exploratorwith 
this  Nhucius  for  our  behaU';  We  require  none  (Ihidi)  neither  we  need  any  ,  for  God  fecth  a!l,and 
doth  all  ,  for  our  benefit)  if  wc  will  coufiantly  love  and  lerve  him  ;  To  be  brief,  he  would 
Teem  to  be  worthy  to  be  thought  well  of  for  his  zealous  good  will  and  fidelity  to  us  ward  ,  in  all  his 
doings  and  layings  ;  The  truth  whereof  Gcd  kncweth  ,  towhomwc  commit  the  cade  between  him 
and  us. 

The  Copy  of  the  wiiting  before  fpccified. 

C/D.  Johannes  Dee,  D.  Eduardus  Kcllcus  ,  &  Fr.  Puccius,  volent  hx  Romam,  m  co;:fi:rtint 
ctim  SummoTontifice de  flits  Revel aiionil^fts-,  vener^fUes  cum  tan^uam  J*?«ft;  Petri  Succejforerri 
&  Ckrifti  in  terris  l^icariuvt  Illufi  ^  Reverend.  Spfcopus  Placeiuinus  Afojro/icin  Nu>u:hs  apiid 
Qxi^xtam  MajefiAtcm  .^  d*hit  Hits  Lit'eras  commcndathnis .,  ut  per  totuw  tier,  &  Komx^  h^?»a- 
tiiJfiTHe  famnmcjue  charttAte  trallentur  ^  &  tiifats  iiecejfuatihm  jttvcntttr  ;  Acfraterea  nuihori^ 
tate  »/ifoftolicAah[»lveteos  cy  Ithenedit  ab  omni  culpa  &  poena,  qtiAm  weriti  effent  in  vita  ante 
iiiia ,  eh  artes  Magicas  exercttatas,  l-arefes-,  falfafeji.'e  opir.iones  ah  eis  fp'trfai  ,  a/it  fi^as  ,  vtrbi-i 
at(t  fcriptis,  ant  aliis  rattonthns  ;  oh  libros  prohibitos  Icilos  ant  fcriptos  ,  Jive  ob  alinA  quodvis 
crimen,  chjks  accnftri  ant  argnt  pojfcKt  inforofaniio  Incjutfttionis,  am  irtforo  qttod  Couteiiciofuni 
vacant;  ant  incjHovis  alio  foroT^omificia  ditionis  :  Neqais  ob  ullnm  peccatum  attt  fcelets  cjitan- 
tnmvis  atrox  ,  quod  iHi  adntiftrim  ame  hoc  iter  fufcepcHm,  eis  HMqtutm  facejjere  negotium  ,  ant 
molefius  ejfe  poffit,  aat  itllo  modo  inqnirere ,  ant  ipfos  accttfare  prefamat. 

For  the  better  ground  of  any  manner  of  anfwcr  making  hereunto  I  asked  the  fame  Fir.  'Ppscci , 
after  fupper,on  Tuefday  the  1 5  of  Jtfljf,  (forafmuch  as  I  had  framed  a  Letter  for  anfwer  to  the  pith  of 
the  Letter  or  writinghere  recorded)whetherthis  Letter  were  written  and  lent  to  us  by  the  confent  of 
this  Nuficifss  Apoftoltctts ,  to  know  our  anfwer  in,orno.  He  feemed  to  be  unwilling  now  diredly  to 
affirm  the  Nuncmt  confent.We  replycd  that  he  had  already  told  us  that  he  had  read  it  thrice  over  to 
the  faid  JV«M(r/»« ,  and  that  he  liked  well  of  it,  and  did  mervail  that  now  he  would  make  ftrange 
to  affirm  the  fame  again ,  feeing  I  had  now  ,  (according  to  his  purpofe)  written  a  plain  and  perfect 
humble  anfwer  to  the  fame  Letter ,  and  much  more  matter  ,  true  and  needful  lor  this  Nuncins  to 
know.  Well,  laid  he  ,  Eatenus  tx  ejus  confenfn  efi,  fi  velitis  ire  Romam  ,  ea  prafiare  conabttHr, 
qUa  ift  eifdem  literis  cotttifientHr,&c.  Well,faidl,  (in  Latin  alwayes  you  muftunderiland  my  talk 
with  him  in  the  fame  fence  here  in  Englifti  recorded  ,if  he  mean  well  unto  us,  and  in  charity  unfeign- 
ed; he  will  notbe  offended  with  my  ani'wer ;  The  Copy  whereof  doth  cnfue. 

JUnJiijpmo  Keverendijpmoque  DominoJ)omino  Epifcopo  Placen-  xheWr- 
imo  apud  Fotenti^inmm  ^  In'viBijfimum  Romanorum  /;«_ 'caption of 
peratorem  Rodulphum  ,  ejus  nominis  Jccnndtttn^  Apoftolico  without. 
Nuncio,  Domino  mihi  (iti  Cbriflo)  Colendijfimo. 

Ilkftrifinw  &  Keverendipme  Domine ,  mihi  Cok/H 
dipme. 


I 


N  Nomine;  SancSae  Bcataj  &  Individus  Trinitatis,  vcftram  IlluAratiffimam  Remember  Fr, 
RcvcrcndiffiraainqucDominationcra  ,  caquavirum  Chriftlanumdccctanimiaffc-^^'^^*''^!"^" 
ftionc&humilitatcfaluco,  non  prcfuraptionc  aliqua ,  vcftris  manibns  oculifvc  i- h!"eor'is  kfpr 
ftas  raeas  obcrudens  litcias  ,  fed  ex  iltius  NhkcU  vejlri  verbis  admonitus ,  non  gracas  in » icther  bag 
folam,  fed  (fcie)  CKpcdatat  fore:  hafcc  aliquot ,  baud  invitus  ,  exaravt  lincolas.  ^j^'j'J^'/^''^''* 
Quibus  cum  non  potcto,  40  annorum  continuum  &  ai;dcntiffimurn  vitx  mccurfum',nd  icid/to 
in  limatioris  quara  vulgaris  vcritatls  Philofophicas  in  dagationc  tranfaftum ,  dcfcribc-  b^  !^="«^d 
tc 5  (vcl  adurabrarc  faltcm)  fatis prcfcnii  noftro  effe pQ§c  inftituco,  fi  prrefcnti  return  'j'ng of'',}!?'/''' 

meia-  Book. 

•    •  •  -.?i. 


4  5  2-     <?^  true  Relation  of  Dr  Dee  his  ABions^withfprits,S>Lc, 

oactaraorphofi ,  &admirandaenegotiorum  noftrorumadiioni,  uidumquc  circuitioni 
multiplici ,  aliquid  cxprimam  quod  maximc  quadrct. 

•  ^b  Anno       Divinicus  ante  aliquoc  annos  ♦  informati,  &  dcindc  ex  AnglU  A  cvocati,  non  fo- 

i^8i,  lum fordflima Dei Omnipotemis  manu ,  &miraculofc,  ex  rriultis  magnifque  evafi- 
i^ /i»ac,i 583.  mus  maris  pcriculis:  ied  cciam ex  variis  hominum  fraudulends  &nuculcmis  contra 
nos,  &  vitamnoftranaconfiliis  &  conacibus,  libcrati  hadcnus  ,  cidem  Deo  neflro 
gratias  laudcfquccanimus  mcnte  grata,  mcnie  laeca,  mcntc  profc^o  Chriftianze,  Ca- 
iholica? ,  Ap(>ftoliccqi]c  Rchgionis  amantiffima  ,  &  (Dei  nos  confirmante  gratia) 
tcnaciflimafutura.  Afteccc,tacncn,quiejufdcm  noftiarpicmatris  (Sandx  EcclcfisE 
Cacholicaf)  leeiiimi  ctiam  ccnfcmurcflcfilii,  nos,  fratrcs  fuos,  inomni  modcftia, 
qaictc,pacc,&civilijuftitia,  inter  illos,  Sc  coram  illis ,  Pr-»^rfConverfantcs,  fubito, 
inexiliumquoddam  ,  five  extcrminium,  C<e/4r<<»  cmitti  nnandato  procurabant  nulla, 
nobi  5  nulla  proifusj  ncqucprivatim,  ncquepuWicedcclarata  tam  violcnii  mandatij 
caulafedvulgari  folum,  &aulica  relatione  nobis  fada  intelliximus  exlibclio  quo- 
dam,  per  vos,  facra:  C'fjarea  Majcftati  cxhibito ,  conflatam  contra  nos  fuifle  maxi- 
mam  Cdfark  indignationem,&quaficxcandcrccntiam :  undeexCanccllaria  Bokemica^ 

•  A»w,i^i6.  aceibKTmium  ad  nos  (facrje  fua;  C-epy*?*  Majcftatis  nomine)  miflTum  fit  *  mandatum 
3«  Man.        (^jjHj  j^  ccdcm  exprcfls ,  cjuldcm  mandati  caufa ,  vel  ratione  Icgitima)  ut  infra  tunc 

fcx  proximos  fcqucntcs  dies ,  Ego,  confers  mcus ,  uxotcs  noftrx ,  liberimci  omnesa 
immo  &  ipfc  infans  nofter  Michael  {Pragenfis  natus,  &  baptizaius)  atque  ad  raairis 
adhuc  pendens  mamillas  5  famuli  etiam  mei ,  &ancill2c,  mcidcniquc  omnes ,  &do- 
meftici,  cxipfaFM^a,  atque itaconfequcntcr,  cxuniverfo  regno 5o/7<rw;<e ,  &  aliis 
quibutcunqnc  facrae  Caftrcx  Majcftatis  Regnis  5  Ducatibus ,  &  terris ,  migrarcmus, 
nunquam  cafdcm  revcriuri ,  fob  tcrribilis  infligcndsepoenie  pcriculo.  Nos  autcm, 
nulla  intcrpolita  mora,  hucmandato C/c/4rw  hdeliter  &  humiliicr  obedirc  nofmet 
accinximus:  Bonaquc  noftra  mobilia  ,  a  pcrcgrinationis  neftr^e  fuppelkdilem ,  tam 
libratiamquamdomeflicam  ,  in  duos  magnos  currus  conici  curavimus :  Reliquorura 
noftrorum  bonorum  ,  partem  unam ,  amicis  dedimus ,  &  pauperibus  difperfimus  & 
diftnbuimus;  Partem  autcm,  dc  facie  terrx,  (propter  caufas  Deo  non  ingratas)  pri- 
■•^««»,  ijstf.  ^jg^  antcexitum  iftumncftrum  ,  pernosdcletam  effc  fciatis:  Aft  optimum  partem, 
xoAinu.  DivjnojufTu,  dccima die /f/'r//«  (quando ctiam,  dc tota hac afflidione ,  & pcrfecu- 
tionenoftra,  Cc^Lisadhucfuturiscramis  divinituspra:moniti.)  Ignis  lucuUntiifimis 
fln^mti  cemmifimus :  qumac  ilia  ,  cju(dem  optima  partis  ,  qua;  nullus  unquamna- 
lurJis  vulgarifquc  ignis  poccrat  iajdcrc  vcl  conlumere  ,  vifibih  trgdtci  mmprio^  ex 
ipfisfurnmsflammisinDivinam,  Angclicamvc  invifibikm  rccipitbantur  Cuftodi- 
am.  Aftlibrorum  DivinorumThcfaurusmaximus ,  tunc,  &  ibidem  (duorumadhuc 
vivcmiumtcftium  diligenti opera,)  ab ipfis flammis in  cineics  tavillamque  converfus 
eft  totus  :  renovationcm ,  reftaurationcm ,  &  quafi  tcgcnerationem  vel  rcfur- 
re^ioncm  quandam,  perDivinam  manum  ,  opportuno  recepturus  tempore  Sacel- 
lum  -J  Dcniquccum  altari  quod  omnipotcnti  Trinitaticonfecrandum  fore  cupicbamus, 
(media  ex  parte  abfolutum)  intadtum  reiinquimus.  Ego  vero,  cum  confortc  meo, 
uxoribus  noftris ,  liberismeis,  &reliquis  exulibus,  five  cxtcrminatis  noftris  RhedUj 
tribus  avcifli,  tranlmigrationcm  banc,  nobis  injuniflam ,  dicpracfinita  ingicffi  fu- 
Xfl»o,  ijstf.  *Tius.  Atque  nondum  ex  Imperii  iJ(?w4»/  finibus  cgreffi  ,  iiagrcffus  noftros  difponi- 
/«»//4.  mus ,  &,  deca;tcro(Deo  favcnte &  gubcrnante)  difponemus:  ut toti orbi  Chriftiano 
elaroapparcrcpotcric ,  paticntct  nos  haec  (qualiacunque)  tolerate  poflc,  autfaltem 
vellc:  &  paratiflimos  eftcnos,  Reddere  Dcoqux  Dei  funt,  ScCaftri  ,  quxfunt 
Cafartf.  Obedicntifllmos  etiam  nos  cffe ,  &  humillimos  facro  hnCtx  Catholics  Ec- 
clefi«filios,  &fummi  Pontificis  Romani,  &aliorum  Ecclefiafticorum  Praefulum 
Catholicorum  •,  in  Chrifto  &  propter  Chriftum  tam  clfe  obfcrvantes  &  fore  ,  quam 
ipfc  qui  Judex  futuruseft  vivorum  &  mortuorum  ,  varriis  nos  effe  modis  haudraro 
admonuit.  Vcftrje  vero  Illuftriflimc,  Rcvercndiifimequc  Dominationi,  hoc  a  Deo 
optamusbonum,  utpcrfecundas  vcftras  (detota  caufa  noftra)  meditaiioncs,  noftra 
Jnttocentia ,  finceritaiis ,  &  fidclis  (coram  Deo  &  hominibus)  in  ilia  Republics  Bohe- 
»»/V4convct(ationisnoftrar,  jufta  habeatur ratio:  Me^quchoneftjefamx,  cxiftima- 
tioniiquc (fine  qua,  ncvivcrc  quidcmcupio)  cafiac  in  integrum  rcftiiuiio:  ut  talis 

poft* 


(^trne  relation  o/Dr.Dee  bis  ABions^withffirits,  &c,      4} 


pofthaccfleindiccturindubitate,  qualis  (antcvcftrum  C<</<r^tf  Majcftati  cxhibitum 
contra  noslibellum,)  pcrjoannos,  (&plurcs)in  omnibus  (poenc)  Chnftiani  orbis 
tam  Academii',  quam  Rcgnis&  Provinciis  (ex  Dei  immcnft  Bonitatc,  gratia  abun- 
dantiflima  &  fingulariprovidentia)  cxticifTc,  baud  obfcuris  confirmari  poffic  tcftimo- 
niis.  Exhiis  igitur  paucis,  Hiftoricc  ipfius  vcritacis  fcintillis ,  Veftrx  Illuftriffim* 
Rcvcrcndiflimcque  Dominationisprudentia,  magnum  fibi  lumen  aliccrc  fivcacccn- 
dercpotuit:  ad  nos,  noftrorum  animorumaffc(5iiones,noftrorum  ita  mirabiiium  &  ad- 
huc  incrcdibilium  negotiorum  progrcffum  &  ftatum  dijadicandum  ,  &dcniqucdc 
ipfotucuro  horum  omnium  cxitu,  baud  Icvcs  (ibi  contcxcndasconjcduras  :  Cum 
nos.cxfoloDcoOmnlpotentc,  &vero&vivo,  in  omnibus  noftris  pendcamus,  & 
ab  ipfo  dirigamur  &  protcgamur.  Cui  foil,  nos ipfos,  noftraquc  omnia ,  Anima*,  cor- 
poris &  Forcunse  nuncupata  Bona,  tanquam  Holocauftum,  quotidianis  noftnshu- 
millimis  &  fpontancis  offcrimus  precibus.  Cui  dcniquc  foli  fie  omnis  laus,  hQnor,glo» 
ria,  &:  gratia  rum  Adio,  nunc  &fcmpcr.    jime». 

P^tae  Erphurdiae,  Anno  1586,  die  16  Julii. 


Fidclis  (in  Chrijio ,  d^  propter  Chrijinm) 
^er'vnlm. 

Joannes  Dee. 


/^ 


This  Letcsr  being  written,  and  read  unto  E,  K.  and  of  him  well  liked  fur  the  quiet  and  modetl 
courle  tlierein  kept ,  otherwile  (as  he  faid  to  Fr.  Pitcct)  then  he  could  have  ufcd  :  or  had  ul'f  d  in  a 
Letter  which  now  he  had  allovTritcen  :  but  now  would  not  fend  ,  thinking  that  my  forelaid  Letter 
might  fiiftlce  for  our  cafe  ,  he  talked  with  Fr.  Pucci  of  this  Letter  ,  which  fr,  Pmcci  faid  he  would 
gladly  (ee  and  read  ,  which  £.  /^T.  told  him  th«t  I  was  minded  not  to  let  him  read  it:  Then  faid 
he,  that  he  would  not  carry  it :  Hereupon  in  talk  with  Fr.  Pucci  ^  fpeaking  of  this  Letter,  I  told 
him  that  I  had  written  a  Letter  with  fufficientanfwer  in  general  to  the  JV«w/>«  requeft  and  offer  by 
liim  in  writing  brought  to  us ,  and  in  lumme  told  him  the  chief  contents  of  the  Letter.  Then  faid 
he,  whereas  jou  write  of  the  Books  burnt ,  why  write  you  not  unto  him  of  the  recover j  of  them,M 
J  MOW  perceive  i>jf  pn  both ,  that  the)  are  reftored  ?  And  it  fliall  be  a  dilgrace  to  you  if  the  Nnnci- 
iu  fliall  und^rlland  more  by  other,  then  by  your  felf .  Thereof  have  I  no  care,  Quod  fcrifji,  fcr iff  ^ 
and  I  know  the  truth  of  my  writing :  And  they  are  not  all  reftored  that  I  know  of:  And  whatlo- 
cvcr  he  hath  at  tny  hands  he  may  be  affurcd  is  true  :  whatfoevcr  he  fhall  otherwifc  hear ,  the  Record 
thereof  cannot  be  fo  good  ,  unleffe,  our  Record  confcnt  thereto  ;  Then  laid  he,  vfhy  write  you  ef 
thof:  Bookj  httrmngy  being  done  before  your  camming  away :  It  is  as  if  you  wrote  backward.  Have 
you  no  care  Mr.  Pucci^  tor  the  method  of  my  Letters  faid  I,  and  I  faid  farther ,  it  is  told  me  that 
unlefle  you  lee  my  Letters  you  Will  not  carry  them  ,  you  fhall  pardon  me  for  feeing  of  them ,  the 
content  I  have  iufficiently  told  you  :  and  if  you  will  not  deliver  them  ,  I  can  ga  them  delivered  di- 
vers wayes,  or  I  may  omit  the  fending  of  thcmi  and  write  fuch  a  Letter  to  the  AT^wc/w  that  I  had 
written anlwer  to  hisrcquefts,  andofetfentby  fr,  Pucci;  Buthcwould  notbringthe  faid  my 
Letter,  unLfl'e  he  might  have  a  fight  of  it  himlelf.  At  the  length  by  farther  difcourfe  with  S.  K.  he 
became  rtfulvcd  tog -)c  with  the  letter,  and  (by£.  A",  his  order)  he  was  to  receive  50  Dollars  of 
"^ohn  Carpioy  that  he  fhould  not  be  delfitutc  of  money  at  Prage.  Fifty  Dollotj; 


NOTE. 


This  day,  Francis  Pncci  laid  to  us  both  ■>  how  can  you  doubt  of  my  fidelity  toward  you  (  whom 
I  love  as  my  own  life, )  and  againli  this  Monfter  of  %omt^  whom  my  chief  defireis,  and  long  puccl  inltdeii- 
hath  been,  that  he  may  be  overthrown,  &c.   Again,confider,  what  fidelity,  obedience,  and  reye- tit  mamjejii/^ 
Tcncehehath  promifed  to  the  Pope,  and  this  Nuneita  ,  as  the  writing  broughtby  him,  and  fo  fore /(w* /aft*, 
and  many  waycs  u'.g^d  by  him,  for  us  to  accept  ot ,  can  fpecific. 

Theiefore  Fr.  is  talfc  to  the  Pope,  or  us,  or  both,or  raQi,fooIifh,blind  ,  &c.  And  (as  our  fpiritual 
S-hoolmailer ,  divsrs  times  termeth  liini)  leprous :  Therefore  I  commit  this  his  doings  to  the  judg- 
ment of  God  :  But  alio  it  is  greatly  to  be  remembred  and  noted  that  he  now  alfo  dilcourfed  again 
with  £.  K.  as  concerning  the  Birth  of  Chritt ,  that  it  could  rot  be  proved  by  the  Scriptures ,  that 
Chiilt  came  of  the  line  of  David ,  unlefle  he  were  begotten  of  the  aftual  copulation  of  Jofephf 
with  (.Mary,  and  'aid  that ,  becaule  it  was  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  ,  that  at  Jofeph  his  firftand 
onely  carnal  copulation  with  ^^r7,Chrilt  was  conceived  ;  Thcicfore  fhe  was  accounted  (in  man- 

L  1  ner> 


434    ^  true  relation  of  Dr.  Dec  his  ABions^withf^irits.^c. 

Videlicet  that  net  a  Virgin  according  to  the  Jews  doftrine  :  which  his  herefie  when  I  heardyl  trembled  for  the  hor- 
is  m;raculous  rour  of  fo  manifeft  an  herefie  again(t  evident  Scripture .^/V^o  concipiet  &  virgo  j>ariet,&c.SiC  againft 
ihiiVngoia  nwny  other  moliplainandfufficient  Authorities  both  of  Scriptures,  and  alio  Hiftoriesot  our  Lady 
piimocu/nviio  her  examination  made  by  Women ,  and  that  fhe  was  found  a  Virgin,  &c.  And  at  her  conception 
csngfelfii  con-  ^^^  anfwer  to  the  Angel ;  ^ia  virum  Mon  cognovi,  &c.  (^  Anteqitam  convcnirtnt ,  juventa  efi  in 
uterohahnsde  fBiritufar,ilo^&c. 

N  O  T  E> 

It  is  evident  hereby  that  this  Pucci  is  very  leprous,  both  in  this  Herefie  (what  other  he  is  infe(5t- 
cd  widi;  God  he  knowech)and  alfo  the  former  infidelity  proved. 

i:.  On  fhurfday  17  July  Fr.Pucci  entred  his  Voyage  toward  Prage  with  my  Letter  to  the  Ntneitt 
AfofioUcM^  and  with  Letters  to  John  Cmrpio  from  £.  iC,  and  with  my  Letters  inclofed  to  the  Lord 
Rofenberg.  And  wc  entred  our  journey  toward  Ctiffd  >  but  that  night  we  rode  onely  three  miles,  to 
Cotha^onr  horfcs  were  fo  ill  that  we  hire<i,and  therefore  fending  them  back  again  the  next  day  ,  we 
hired  a  Coach,  &c. 

POSCRIPTUM. 

Remember  ttet  Fr-  Pncci,  the  morning  before  his  going  required  of  me  our  Letters  Teftimonial 
toourfriends,  of  his  fidelity  toward  us.  What  needeth  that  (faid  I)for  as  muchasyour  deeds  were 
as  well  known  to  them  as  to  us,  your  own  confcience  to  your  felf  may  ferve  abundantly.  But  our 
friends  divers,  who  have  warned  us  of  you,  and  have  marvelled  why  we  would  fuffer  you  any  longer 
in  our  houfc  and  company,  would  neither  credit  our  Letters  as  yet  in  this  cafe.  And  would  alfo  con- 
demne  us  of  light  judgment,  or  great  blindnefs  to  judg  the  caufe  between  you  and  us. 

But  tmly  I  obferved  m  him,  now,  a  more  proud  prefuming  over  us  then  hitherto,  before ,  when  he 
was  fore  rebuked,  for  over-crowing  us,  fo  as  he  began  to  do. 
Prxfumpth,  I  Novvhefaid,  he  had  as  great  authority  as  we  to  publifh  any  of  our  Secrets,  at  hisdifcretion. 

2  That  he  ought  to  eat  bread  with  us. 

^  That  he  underltood  our  Books  ot  Ailions  better  then  we. 

4  That  he  needed  not  our  confent  or  counfail  to  deal  with  the  Pope  his  NunciM :  he  did  it  by  his 
duty  general,  ot  Charity,  Sec. 

5  He  offered  to  order  the  Nuficitti^znd  the  Emperor  to  the  reclaiaiing  of  the  Decree  made  a§ainft 

USj&C 

NOTE. 

Confider  what  this  may  import ,  that  the  Decree  couching  him,  being  one  of  my  houfhold  com- 
pany, and  of  them  that  then  did  appertain  tome  ,    and  whole  name  he  is  not  affraid  one  way  and 
*  ^'^«  f''''?-    another  way  not  abal'hed  to    *  thrulf  himfelf  into  the  whole  body  of  our  Revelations ,  as  a  princi- 
tu.71  Ulim  de      p^j  ^^\\ry^^  or  Receiver  of  them.  By  the  firft  he  ought  to  be  afraid  of  the  danger  of  the  Decree  which 
\miino  &c     t>a°'^-'l  us,  unlefs  h:  is  affured  of  their  good  will  who  have  fhcwed  themfelves  our  mortal  enemies, 
or  el(e  fon\e  other  caufe  emboldiied  him  tofomc  other  purpofe  ,  &c.   by  the  fecond  he  might  be  a- 
ftaidof  fo  great  prefumption,being  but  a  7'>'«^'»t'<'w'"  5  not  yet  allowed  of ,  and  to  us  known  to  be 
cut  off. 
I.  Dt  ^^'  '^^'^"  points  I  cannot  decipher  and  judj»e,  but  referre  them  to  the  profound  wifdome  and  high 

providence  of  God,  wherefore  and  how  tarre  he  hath  admitted  him  to  be  privy  of  our  Aftions, -and 
lo  a^itnefs  to  fome purpofe s  fftjficient.  All  things  be  to  the  honour  and  glory  of  God-  Amen, 

SVfagnifice  Domine, 

LESiis  tins  Uteris  fui  miratus  qtiod  inteUigerem  te  illiU'S  ejje  o- 
pinionis  (^  fententix^  me  apud  Cxfarem  ttbi  ac  conforti  tuo  of. 
jiciis  mcis  nonparitm  ohfitijfe  ,  qnod  fciam  ita  me  ^  religione 
d^  Jiatura  comparatum  ,  ut  omnibm  quam  maxime  cupiam  prodefTey 
nemiiti  ant  obejfe.  Onod  autcm prajiiterim  quod  mei  erat  officiij  mihi 
vitio  <vertinofz  debet,  detentm  aim  inter  fttmmumVontilicem  ,  ^ 
Caelarem,  merm  fim  interpres^  non  (video  quid  in  hoc  i;efiro  negotio 
Jpr^Jiare  pojpm  :  Confulo  antem  ,  ut  'vejiram  innocentiam  ,   de  fide 
Catholtca  Jenfum  ,  <^'   de  Angelorum  con<verfatione  ^  ajfijientiay 
qnam  'vijibdem    habere    dicitis  ,  juxta   Concilii  Lateranenfis   in 
uudecima  Sejpone  decretujn^  coram  Summo  Pontijice  (^  Sede  Apo- 
fiolica  dedncatis ,  ^  ita  exponatis  nt  non  pojfit  cniqnaM  ejfe  dn- 

binam 


^trne  relation  o/Dr.Dee  his  /d&iom,mthfpirits,  &c.     435 


bium  quid  fentiatiSj  qnififede  Jpoftolica  approbafite  ,  fides  into  ah 
omnibHS  Angelicis  affertionibm  'z/eftris  ,  prxfiari  pojpty  <^  turn  de-' 
mum  C^  obtreSiatoribm^  fi  qui  [nut  y  ora  obilitdentur.  Nee  nt  arbi- 
tror  gra've  fvobis  'videbitur  conjilinm  ft;enmyfi  enim  ea  'vobis  eji  in  fide 
Catholicapiiritas  atqne  confiaiitia^  ea  in  prxfenti  Angelornm  commii- 
nione  finceritM^  'vitx  integritas^c!^  innocentia^  nt  afferitis  :  Me  etiam 
tacente  occafionem  quxntis  declarandx  'veflrx  fidei  <^  bonitatis,  C^ 
hac  una  ratione  honori  'yejiro  (cujjfs  'vos  rationem  habendam  dicitiSy 
^  cui  tantiim  ahefl  quod  per  me  aliqitid  fit  detraSiiim^  nt  ilium  etiam 
fro  'z^iribm  quantum  officii  mei  ^  injunSli  muneris  ratio  patietur, 
fcvere  fim  paratm^nt  Domino  Piiccio  pluribns  dixi)  ^  omnibm  'vi- 
tx  commodis  'vel  maxims  confuletis.   Dem  oratia  fua  'vos  ita  reoat^ 
lit  Angclorum  con'verfationein  in   Ca^lis  aliquando   habere  pofjitis. 
Fa!e?ra.gx  ,  die  28  Jnlii  1586. 
Magnific.  D.V. 

Ex    Corde  in  Clrifio  frater 

Philip.  £p//c«?p//^i"  Placenti- 

iius  Nuncius. 

Magnific.  Domino  Joanni  Dec,  Anglo,  ^c. 


^  Oraculum  Divinum. 

MZJlta  fnnt  flagella  prxcepta  mea  negligentium /.Mw/^/^/ex- 
que  furor  hominibus  propriis  confidentibn^  'viribm.  Hi  enim 
contemptores  fangninis  <^  Kegni  mei  fortitudinis,  Gigantes 
faBi  fiuntj  ad  omnem  abominationem  mnltiplicandam.  Sed  ego  Sum 
qui  jum,  qui  pofui  in  Fatre  Solium  'verbumquc  ad  faciendum  inter- 
ris  Judicium  :  qui  in  ultima  Tuba  percutiam  illos  ,  ut  coaSii  recog- 
nojcant  ijias  meaSy  ^  ad  ovile  proprium  redeant.  Pcribit  Ecclefix 
C^  populi  IniquitaSy  ^judicabitur  in  gladio.  Tu  i/ero  Culielme,»/^- 
num  in  tempore  extende  opportuno,  prout  a  me  informaberisj  C^  ^^g- 
num,  (taBo  ^  morientc  nequijpmo^  adjunBum  indue  :  Inunxi  enim 
te  infortifpma  d extra  mea,  ad  faHum  ilium  Prophetam ,  d^  Goliath 
\^  forte  Mahometanos  ^  Turcot'^  extirpandum  ttt  intelligat  Terra  ju- 
dicium a  'Na'Xjareno  Crucifixo  me.  Sunt  qui  cribarent  te  :  fed  male- 
diSii  funt  machinantes  in  te  malum.  F ac  bonum  ,  c^  utere  creaturis 
meis  ad  gloriam  meam  Docui  Kelleum,  inquiete,  hac  noSie,  de  cxte" 
ris,  qux  ab  illo  difces.   Spiritus  mem  habitet  in  'yobis. 


7>*^o«^,  ft/fy«#  1589-  <J\{en[>s  Augujtifine. 

Wheti  Mr.  Kelly  was' gone  from  m;  ac  Salfeild  toward  Behemia ,  and  in  the  mean  fpace  tbeEni- 

5>T0ur  liad  "ranted  to  the  Lord  Rofettterg  licence  for  us  to  return  into  BehimtA ,  :o  any  of  hijS  Lord- 

''  LI  J  fliips, 


45^    ^yi  ^^^^  relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Anions,  vntb  joints  J^c. 


fhips,  Towns,  Cities,  Catties,  &c.  This  was  delivered  written  by  fpiritual  and  divine  BKanes ,  and 
the  writing  yet  remaineth  in  my  Lord  his  hands,  out  of  which  1  copyed  this  for  the  order  of  our 
Hiliory  fomewhat  making  plain. 


Francifcus  Puccius  frxjiantijfnnis  ac  Deo  dileBis  ifiris  D  D. 
Joanni  Dee  C^  Eduardo  Kelleo  generofis  Anglis,  majoribus  in 
Chrijio  fratribns  ,  d^  ipj^-^  tanqnam  fatribns  colendis  ,  precatttr 
gratiam  <^  pace?ft  a  Deo  patre  /icjiro,  ^  a  Domino  Jefn  Chrijio, 
Amen. 

EX  quo  a  vobis  difccftl,  toto  illo  itinerc,  quodo6Vodiebus  con- 
feci ,  vendito  Lipfix  cquo,  haud  parum  vexatus  fuit  meus  fpi- 
ritus,  dum  animum  mccum  volveiim,  quot  modis  Satanas divi- 
num  opus  retardare  &:  noftiam  coi  juiiftioiiein  dirimere,  adhibitis 
exterioribus  &:  interioribus  machinib  &:aimis,  tentavcrit,  &  adhuc 
tentaie  non  ccffet.  Ncquc  enim  poffum,  riifi  ab  eo,  agnofcere  affla- 
tus illos  diffidentic,  lumtres  ab  invidis  hominibus,  fpaifos,  fufpitio- 
iies  nobis  in)e£i:as,  abique  certis  iiidicii'^,  adverfus  ridem  non  Icvibus 
aigiimentis  probatam,  atque  hu^uimodi  impedimenta  &  oftendicu- 
la,  quibiis  curium  noftrum  impcdite  ac  landam  amicitiam,  divinis 
aufpiciis,  inter  nos  coeptam,  cohvellcre  ac  labefa£iare,  malignusille 
fpiritus  aggrcffus  eft.  Itaquc,  in  ilia  luda,  ne  ullo  modo  manus  illi 
darem,  aut  fatifccrem  ,  dccrevi  me,  magis  ac  magis,  munire  certa 
fide  in  Dpum,  ac  fpe  promilllonum  c]\iSy  quas  ilium  fervaturum  non 
dubito,  tUm  precibus  frequentioribus  magis  inftare,  apud  fummum 
patrem,  ut  nos  qiiam  primum  donare  velit  illo  fpiritu  ,  quo  noftri 
humeri  montibus  ferendis,  ut  ille  inquit,  pares  evadent  i  ad  haec  au- 
ftcriorcm  vitam  iiiftituerc  nee  menfa?  lautas  amicorum  adire  ,  fed 
panem  doloris  folus  comedere  decrevi ,  ne  fim  meliore  conditione 
quam  vos^qut  tantopere  affiigimini^nt  benigniffimus  Dominus  quam- 
primunijvos  in  integrum  reltituat,  atque  ad  Tolita  colloquia  piaque 
excrcitia  nos  una  rcvocet,  &  eventu  confentaneo  fuis  fandifllmis  di- 
clis,  (ingulos  noftrum  exhilaret.  Hanc  viam  fequcnti  Dominus  mihi 
Ipem  facit  fore  ,  ut  vobis  &  aliis  facilius  meam  fideni  probem  ,  8c 
multas  tentationes  vitem  qux  apud  hujus  mundi  homines  facile  nos 
invadunt.  Ideo,  niii  neceflltate  urgentc,  autcommunibus  negotiis, 
familiaritatem  omnem  &  convi£ium  cum  aulicis  fugio  ,  Si  me  hoc 
modo  minus  incptem  precibus  gentio,  mcamque  vitam  &  mores  in 
dies  emcndare  conor,  ne  videar  omnino  indignus  ea  fchola  ,  in  qua 
Doiiiinus  me  erudire  dignatus  eft,  nee  interim  cum  Publicano,  illo, 
precari  oblivifcor,  uc  Dcus  propitius  fit  mihi  peccatori.Vos  non  du- 
bito  me  veftris  votis  &  fupplicationibus  juvabiris,  ut  vocatione  mese 
rcfpondeam,  &  in  opere  Domini  vobis  adjumento  &:  confolationi 
efle  poflim  :  Si.  benignifllmus  ille  pater  prppediem  hoc  adverfo  ven- 

to 


(^true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dec  bis  ABiom,  mtffirirsy  &c.     43^ 

to  ignem  fuum  magis  excitari  curabit,  ac  nos  majoii,  quam  unquam 
antea ,  ^ucunditate  recrcabit.  Ac  de  his  hadcnus.  Quod  veio  ad 
noftra  negotia  attinct  h  perveni  hue  die  24  Julii,  fub  vefperam,  ac 
ftatim  adivi  lUnftriJjrwHm  Dominnm  Nnficinm  ,  cui  veftras  tradidi,  , 
quas  Iseto  vultu  accipere  vifus  eft  :  fed  colloquendi  non  fuit  otium, 
cum,  parata  coena  ,  jam  difcumbcre  vcUct.   In  pofteriorem  Diem 
igitur  re)e£ius,  ad  Dontinnm  Carpionem  me  conferebam  ,  cum  didici 
eum  ad  vos  Milium, quatiiduo  ante,  hinc  difcefliffe.Dolui  admodum 
cum  non  clle  mihi  obviam  factum ,  tum  ratione  veftrarum  ,  turn 
mcarum  litciarum  ,  quoniam  fafciculum  quendam  ad  me  quoque 
terebat.   Sed  quod  maxime  me  torqucbat  crat  cura  de  littcris  i^«- 
ilrijjimi  Domini  Kofenbergu^  quas  fciebam  inclufas  Domini  Carpi- 
onis  Uteris,  nee  cas  apcrire,aut  alii  traderc  audebam,  cum  diferte  ef- 
iet,  fcriptum  illud  ad  manm  prcprias.Dum  itaquc  occafionem  qucro 
Si  expedo,  ca  fcfc  obtialit,  quam  mox  audietis.  Reverfus  fequenti 
viie,  ad  lllujiri^imum  Domhnim  Islnncmm,  invenio  apud  ilium  Jefni" 
tarn  Italnm^  qui  mihi  fuit  a  confefllonibus  :  blande  ab  ambobus  ac- 
cipior,  federc  jubeor,  a  Jefmta  nomine  candoris  Sc  ingenuitatis,non 
parum laudoi.Tum  lupide  moncorab  lUnJtnjpmo  Domino  'Nuncio  ut 
ipli  adfim,  in  conv^ertendo  Jefmta  ille(is  cnim  erat  qui  cum  ipfo  ex- 
poftulaverat,quod  nimis  facile  mihi  dedlflet  :  tejiitnonia  triumphafi" 
tis  Ecclcfix  non  fubjici  jndicio  ntilitantts.)  Refpondeo  me  fecifle 
quod  in  me  erat  ut  docerem  eum  prgeferre  Coelum  terra; ,  ac  tribu- 
nal fuperius  inferiori^  fed  cum  id  mihi  fninime  fucceflet,  ejus  effc,  fua 
do£lrina  &:  autoritate,  hominem  de  fentcntia  ilia  dejicere  lUnjirijfi^ 
inns  Dominm  Nnncim  haud  gravate,noftram  fententiam,hac  in  par- 
te, probat,  Sc  exemplis  confirmat,  atqne  ita  conclndit^  nt  flatnat  cer~ 
titudinem  <vidcntis  ^  audientis  Dominnm  ,  .ant  ejus  angelum  ,  non 
pendere  a  probalione  Ecclefiajiica,  ncqjie  ah  illo  ejfe  rationem  repetefi" 
dam  jux  rcvclationis.^  dam  nihil  pnblici  mttneris  exercere  audet  :  fed 
fi  incipiat  palam  profit eri^fe  a  Deo  doSiitm  d^  mijfitmj  ita  nt  non  ip-* 
fiHs  foliim  ,  fed  aliorum  qnocpie  interfu ,  fcire  quo  jpiritn  agatiiVy 
tunc  Ecclefi-aJiiiOKitm  mitnns  ejfe  y  illius  jpiritnm  examinare  i^  pto-^ 
hare,  neqne  ipfnm  jure  poffe  examen  hoc  detreSiare,  licet  fuas  reve- 
lationes  eis  fubjicere  minime  teneatur.     Nam  fi  ordinaria  autoritas 
cumadmiferat,  bene  habebit ,  nihilque  turbarum  excitabitUr:  fin 
per  injuriam  aut  infcitiam  aliquam  ,  aut  per  aliam  hujufmodi  cau-^ 
lam,  rejicietur,  fuum  erit  appellarc  Supcriorem  Dominum  ,   qui  ip-  , 
fum  miilt,quo  fuum  fcrvum  &  Legatum  defendat,  aut  ordinario  Ju-^ 
dice  commonefa6:o,  aut  alia  ratione  :  quod  probabat  decreto  La» 
teranenje  Concilii,  cujus  mentionem  facit  in  fuis  Uteris  i  ac  praeterea 
hiftoria  S.  Francifci^  qui  primum  expulfus  ab  Innocentio  Fontifi<:e^  , 
mox  revocatus  fuit ,  cum  per  quietem  apparuiffc  Pontifici  pannofus ' 
ilk,  qui  Ldteranenje  templum  fuis  humeris  fulcirct.  Addcbatprxtc-^ 
rea  viros  Dei  non  effe  folitos  detcrreri  una  aut  altera  rcpulfa,  &  hoc 


43^*     <?-^  ^^^^  ^^tation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^mtbfprhs^^c, 


repellendi  modo,  dicebat  Praeiules  aliquando  ufos  efle,  ut  probarent 
fpiritum  &:  conilantiam  eorum  qui  res  novas  magnafque  propone- 
rent.  Ego  vero  inquam,  ut  \vxc  ita  fe  habeant ,  Vos  haEietJiis  publi- 
cum munus  exercete  noti  tcutaffe-,  C^  intra  pri'vatos  parictes^  fnmma 
modejiia  'vos  continuijj^c.  Turn  ille,  longiori  ambitu  vcrborum,  fie  de 
vobis  diflcrint,  ut  ex  veftris  verbis  Sereniffimum  Folofiix  Rcgem,  ad 
invi^liffimum  Cxfarem  ,  Sc  ad  Illulb-iffimum  Legatum  Hij^ankuni^ 
jam  conftare  diceret,  vos  aliquid  amplius  quam  privatum  moliri:  Ac 
Summo  Pontifici,  Tcdcnti  in  ipecula  llipcr  totam  ChriftianamRcm- 
pablicam  potuille  merito  iuipe£tas  cfle  vcftras  pcrfonas ,  hoc  modo 
Principum  animos,  &:  interiores  aularum  receffus  fcrutantes :  Idque 
ratione  vcftr^e  Regnae,  infcnfiillmie  Apoftolicge,fedi3&  cum  ipfo  T«r- 
ca  confpirantis,  necnon  jpintus  familiares  habcntis  ac  praeterea  ra- 
tione veftrx  fummx  pcriti^e,  in  artibus  &:  fcientiis  reconditis,  quibus 
facile  plebi  &  imperitis  imponi  poteft.  Cum  enim  fitis  magni  Aftro- 
logi,  dicebat  illc,  be  facile  vobis  lie  habere  gencfes  principum,  nec- 
non Magicas  artcs  calleatis,  haud  difficultcr  polTetior  bonorum  y^«- 
gelormn  nomine^  ca  propoz/erc^qux  a  Ipiiitu  Ecclcfiic  hofte  manarent. 
Ideo  Summum  Pontihcem,  (cui  duo,  ill)  Principes  iunt  maxime  ob- 
fervandi,  urpote  qui  inter  Haereticos  vivant  &  rcgnent)  prudenter 
feciirc,qui  jufferit,  ut  in  veftros  mores  &  doflrinam  inquireretur.Ac- 
cidille  autem  praeter  ejus  poftulatam  &  voluntatcm,  ntj  indiBa  cau- 
fa,  expelleremmt.  Se  vero  vicem  nollram  dolere,  &  paratum  efTe  ad 
curandum,  ut  vos  jultilicare  poflltis,  idque  fibi  efle  in  votis,  non  fe- 
mel  afferint  Quapropter  hortatus  eA  me,  ut  ad  lllHJirijfirnitm  Domi- 
num  Kofeubergium  contenderem,atque  iplius  bonam  propenfionem, 
erga  vos,ei  fignilicaremj  Nam  ille  a  Summo  Pontitice  facile  impetra- 
bit,  ut  caufa  veftra  hie  cognolcarur,  &  {i  ille  vobis  faverit,  ut  hade- 
nu«  fecit,  le  quoque  adfuturum  vobis  omnibus  officii?,  ac  primum 
fore,  qui  ie  veftris  genibus  obvolvaty/  tales  eritis  ,  quale s  'vos  non- 
viilli  prxduatit.  Ego  igitur  re(3:a  ad  lUufirif.  D.  Kofenbergium.  Sed 
quatcr  redeundum  mihi  fuit,  antequam  admitterer.  Die  27  tandem 
adinidls,  expofui  meum  ftudium,erga  vos  reique  veftras,ac  quomodo 
IllnJi.D.l^Hficim  A^cdus  ergavos  eiret,ac  tandemoravi  utnon  defere- 
ret  patrocinium  Be  defenfionem  illam,  quam  {u{ce^'i{[et  peregrinornm 
pn'f/t/jpmornm,  qui  a  Caefare  minus  bene  informato  ad  Caeiarem  me- 
lius informatnm  ,  provocarcnt ,  ac  fuam  innocentiam,  Dei  &  ho- 
minibus,  probatam  cuperent.  Hie  humaniter  refpondit :  Vos  non  ad- 
modum  fibi  notos  ciTc  :  fc  bis  cum  fcuiore^  femel  tantnm  cum  juniore 
coUocutnm  ,  jndicajfe  z>os  doSios  cj^'  pios,  <^'  prxclaris  donis  infirn- 
6ios  :  exiftimare  vobis  hoc  accidifie  mala  aliqua  relatione  cui  incom- 
modo  a  res  principum  funt  obnoxiae  :  veftrum  efle  id  aequo  animo 
ferre:non  fe  poenitere  quod  vobis  faverit,  &  fi  fcirit  quid  potifllmum, 
afe,  pcteretis,  daturum  operam,  ut  veftris  votis  refponderetur.Tunc 
mihi  vifum  eft  nonnulla  dicere  de  optima  fpe ,  quam  de  ipfo  conce- 

pifletis, 


i 


(^true  9{elation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  A&ions,  mth^irirs,  &c.    439 


pifTetis  ,  &:  quomodo  me  non  dimiieratis  line  Uteris  ad  ilium  :  Sc<i 
erant  inclufaj  faiciculo  D.  Jvan.  Carpionis^  quern  ftatim  protuli, 
atque  eo  inftante  ac  rcfpondente  D.  Carpionem  non  aegre  laturum 
fi  ipfi  dediflem^tradidi  fafcicylum  cijqui  dixit  fe  per  otium  lefturum ^ 
ac,  lequenti  die,  mihi  refponrurum.  Difcedo  igitur  ab  illo  ad  Illuft. 
D.  NnnciHm,  atque  otium  na£l;us,tum  per  me,  tum  per  Uluft.  Lcga- 
tum  Florentimtm  ,  pluribus  cum  eo  agere  inftituo,  de  infigni  injuria, 
f  obis  faBa:  ex^ono  quantopore  laboraveritis,  ut  confidere  pofTetis, 
apudCatholica  Templa,&:  quam  inhumaniter,  in  hofpitiis  &  civita- 
tibus  ratione  hujus  pr;^)udicii  C^Jarei ,  tra6]:aremini,  doceo  quam 
lordido  3^  anguflo  loco  vcftras  farnilias  reliqueritas ,  ita  ut  veftram 
fupelle6:ilem,  &  libros  explicare  nequi  vcritis  i  Moneo,  ut  Domini 
Dec  )am  grandis  natu,  aut  potius  fenis,  &  nihil  tale  ha6:enus  pafll 
vicem  doleat  j  ejus  erumnas  non  tanquam  fimplicis  hominis  confide- 
randas  effe,  cum  vir  fexagenarius,  quatuor  tenellis  fuaviflimirqiie  li- 
beris  (quorum  major  feptimum  annum  vix  exceflcrit)  ac  diledifli- 
msE  conjugi  adjundi;^,  longe  gravius  affligatur  ,  ratione  uxoris  fuse 
Icdiruma;  foeminse,  Sc  pignorum  chariflimorum,  quam  fui  ipfius  ■■,  o- 
ftendo  quanto  ofFcndiculo  hoc  futurum  fit  Catholicis  Anglis  ,  ac 
ceteris ,  &  quanta  anfa  prxbeatur  haereticis,  invehendi  in  Ecclefia- 
fticum  ordinem  :  declaro  periculum  imminens  ordini  illi,  fi  forte  De- 
us  facultatibus  veftris  ad  eos  ple£lendos  eorum  inimicos  armari  per- 
mitteret  :  Demonftro  Deum  alias,  per  liaelitas  hxreticos  Catholi- 
cos  Jndneos  punire  confueviflc  :  ac  denique  declaro,  quam  abfur- 
dnm  fit  iios  indiBa  caujfa  cottdemnari,  fi  id  meriti  fitis  :  quanto  ab- 
furdius,  fi  non  meriti  fitis  quicqnam  tale  :  abfiirdiffimum  vero,  cum 
a  Catholica  Ecclefia  honor  potius  vobis  deberetur  :  Ac  cum  non 
petatis  nifi  ut  vobis  vos  purgare  liccat ,  nihil  magis  confentaneum 
rationi  excogitari,  nuUo  alio  modo  errorem  admifium  emendari, 
atque  hoc  negotium  bene  dirigi  &  redintegrari  poffe.  Hie  mihi  le- 
git veftras  literas,  id  eft  D.  Dee^  fedde  rebus,  ambobus  vobis,  ali- 
quo  modo,  communibus :  dicit  fe  non  credere  ea  ,  quae  de  divinis 
monitis  &  miraculis,  in  illis,  continentur,  petit  ut  ipfe  declarem  ob- 
fcuriorem  locum  de  libris  combuftis  ;  audit  a  me  tejlimoninm  ocnla- 
turn  de  illis  concrematis,  d^  quomodo  'vobis  audi^erim  eos  ejje  ca'li- 
tus  refiitutos,  ac  deniqueconcludit  in  illis  Uteris  eife  multa  lauda- 
bilia,  multa  admirabilia,  multa  itidem  incredibilia  i  fed  cum  non 
fint  Deo  impofilbilia ,  fe  fufiinere  affenfum,  nee  velle  quicquam 
certi,  re  non  penitus  explorata,  pronunciare  :  vobis  tamen  refpon- 
furum  humanitcr,  ac  daturum  mihi  literas ,  quod  fecit  poftea  die 
28,  quas  literas  ad  vos,  cum  hifce,  mitto.  Et  quia  legendi  eas  mihi 
fecit  copiam,/^fzx  jejunias  ^  frigidas  miht  effe  'uifns  ,  hand  dijfi^ 
mulo  Tamen  quia  mentionem  aliquam  mci  facit,  tanquam  hominis 
cum  quo  fufiusde  fuo  animo,erga  vos,  egcrit,vifum  eft  mihi  accu- 
rate ic  particulatim  exponere^  quid  inter  nos  a£lum  di^uijjve  fit,  ut 

vcrb'a.' 


^4o     (^  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Anions, with  fprits.d^c. 

verba  cum  fadis  conferrc  poffitis ,  &  pro  vcftra  prudentia  &  pic- 


tate,  confilium  capere,  &:  fi  operae  precium  videbitur  refcriberc. 
Quantum  enim  ex  e)us  Termonibus  coUigo,  videtur  ipli  neceffarium 
novum  mandatum,  a  fummo  Pontifice,  ^ntequam  quicquam  vobii- 
ciim  agati  nee  fc  fciipturum  dicit  de  vobis  Komam^mCi  ^nus  fetalis 
qttodab  ejus  fanBitate  capitis  :  utpote  qui,  in  hac  caufa,  fuerit 
mcrus  interpres,  inter  Pontificem  Sc  C^farem  ■■>  nee  poflit,  nifi  verbis 
iui  Domini  quicquam  promittere  &  ftatuere.  Idcirco,  quantum  vi- 
dere  poffum,  res  diutius  protrahetur  quam  vcllemus,  nifi  Dominus 
nofter  &  Pontifex  ccekftis,  alio  modo,  nobis  providerit.  Die  28  & 
29  invcni  llluft.  P.  Kofenbergium  tam  occupatum,  utadmitti  non 
potuerim,  fed  per  cubicularium  fignificavit,  le  valde  cupere  ut  collo- 
quercmur,  itaque  rcdircm  die  30.  Interim  fui  rurfus  cum  Illuftrif- 
fimo  D.  'NunciOy  mox  ditceffuro  ad  Saniii  Caroli  Monailerium,  ubi 
commorabitur  quamdiu  hi  eftus  fsevient.  Et  cum  commodo  ceci- 
diffetj  in  coUoqucndo,  vifum  eft,  mihi  interrogare  hominem,an  pro- 
baret  mesim  fententiam  de  difcernendo  ex  certis  notis  Sc  terminis  ve- 
rum  verbum  Dei  a  fifto  &  f  ucato  ,  cum  poffit  angclus  malus  tranf- 
formare  fe  in  angelum  lucis  &  Apoftata  falfi,  non  raro,  fe  transfigu- 
rent  in  Apoftolos  Chrifti.  Dicebam  enim  duo  mihi  videri  necefl'aria, 
ut  hoc  judicium  rite  fiat,  primum  quidem,  in  homine  audiente,  bo- 
na propenfio&:  animus  bene  affeiius  ad  Creatorem,totufque  exei  ita 
pendens,  ut  nihil  antiquius  habeat  quam  ei  placere  ,  &  qui  de  ejus 
benignitate  atque  veritate  non  dubitet  erga  eos,  qui  ad  ipfum  con- 
fugiunt,  ut  bonum  fpiritum  hauriant.  Deinde  in  fermone,  nomine 
Dei  propofito,  requiri  eas  proprietates,  qux  tantum  authorem  de- 
ceant  h  quas  graphice  defcribit  Panlus,  cum  dicit,  f^i'vu^  eji  enim 
fermo  Dei  ^  eiHcax  ,  c^  penetrabilior  omni  oladio  ancipiti,  d^  per- 
ttngens  ufqae  ad  di'vijionem  anima  ac  jpiritus^  compagmn  quoque  ac 
vieduUarum,  d^  dtfcretor  cogitatioNum  C^  intentionnm  cordis^  <^  non 
eji  nlla  creatnra  in'vifibilvs  in  confpeSlit  ejus.  Cui  adftipulatus  Deus, 
7f,-.ij,i8,i,.  qui  apud  Jeremiam  diciV^Propheta  qui  f omnium  habet^femnzHm  nar- 
retyCt  qui  'verba  mea  habetyZ^erbamea  narret.Qjtid paleis  cum  tritico} 
dicitDominHS.Nnnqitidnon  'verba  meafuntqnafi  igms}dicitDominm, 
quafi  vtalleM-s  conterens  petram}  Concludebam  igitur,hominem  Deo 
fidentem,  excfficacitate  &  ardore  illo,quo  afficilepercipit,deprehen- 
dcre  Icrmonis  Dei  veritatem.  Nam  vox  lupi  &  alieni  paftoris  non 
poteft  permovero  veram  ovem,  ut  ipfum  diu  fequatur,  &  banc  efle 
regulam  ,  qua  judicarem  divinas  fententias  a  non  divinis ,  diftingui 
poffe  :  Ille  probabit  meam  fentcntiam,atque  addidit,  fine  bono  ftu- 
dio  auditorum,non  apparereefficacitatemdivinorumfermonum,  ut 
conftat  ex  Chrifti  hiftoria.  Dum  enim  fimplices  IfraelitCj  dicebanti 
NunqHidfic  loqmttus  eft  homo^Sc  fimilia  de  Chrifti  do&:nn3i^Pharifdef 
Be  perverfi  Sacerdotes  cum  deridebant  &  contcmnebant.  Tunc  ego, 
ii  contingeret  igitur,  ut  cum  congredicinur,  fieret  ad  tc  verbum  Do- 
mini, 


I 


(^true  relation  of  Dr.  Dec  bh  Mions, with ff  irks,  &c.     441 


mini,  num  hujufcemodi  regula  utercris.  Hie  illc  inquit,  cum  poffet 
accidere  ,  ut  mihi  de  hac  re  judicandum  effet ,  nolo  hoc  tempore, 
meam  fentcntiam  dcclarare,  Ted  hujufcemodi  ratio  non  mihi  mala 
videtur.  Ex  quibus  verbis  nefcio  quid  mihi  vifus  fum  adorari  minus 
candidum,  quam  in  re  tanta,  opus  cflet.  Scd  Dei  efto  judicium  de 
ejus  interiori  lenfu.  Ego,  bona  tide,  colloquia  noftra  expolui ,  ut 
vobis  ufui  effe  poflint,  ratus  hoc  vobis  gratum,  ticut  toret  mihi  fi  ve- 
ftro  locoeffem.  Rcverlus  die  30,  ad  llluft.  D.  Kejciibergmm  vidi 
eum  tandem  exeuntem,  ex  cubiculo,  ad  quofdam  nobilcs  ,  et  dixit 
fe  tantopere  diftridum  efTe  ,  ut  mecum  colloqui  non  poffet.  Sicut 
cuperet.  Ego  vero,  inquam  me  S-  Cellltudinis  monitu,  toties  rcver- 
fum  expc£i:are  ejus  reiponium,  et  an  vobis  relcribere  vellct.  Tunc 
ilk  inquit  prius  tecum  coUoqucndum  eft  mihi,  itaque,  (ut  ejus  ver- 
bis utar)  habeas  patientiam,  aliquot  dies  donee  ego  pro  te  mittam, 
et  fie  me  dimifit.  Docui  igitur  Vcncejlanm  cubicularium  noftras  x- 
des,  qui  dixit  ie  optime  callere  locum,  ac,  fuo  tempore ,  memorem 
fore  mei,  cum  Dominus  me  accerfet.  Expeftans  igitur  au,t  re  pon- 
lum  Illuftriillmi  D.  Kofenbcrgii^  aut  aliquid  aHud  dignum  veftris  au- 
hbuSj  non  viium  eft  mihi  id  vos  exprcffum  nuncium  mittere  :  Mo- 
nente  prxlertim  Domino  Se'vcmbergio ,  vobis  effe  paratis  neicio 
quas  sedes  in  oppido  Naitn  ^  ia  Comit2itu  Suarrebnrgcnfij  &  ut  ex- 
pedarem  reditum  Domini  Carpionis^c^uem  propediem  reverfurum 
iperabat,  ne  fine  magna  caufa  atqueincertus  de  loco  veftrse  fedis,ad 
vosliteras  dirigerem.  Igitur  non  parum  folicitus  de  vobis  Sc  de  redi- 
tu D.CarpomSj  temel  ad  minimum  in  die,  ejus  xdes  adeo,atque  in- 
terrogo  fi  quid  de  illo  fignificetur  ,  nee  quicquam,  per  multos  dies 
audio. Tandem  de  diei  2  Angufli  fcifitor  Y^Millernm  an  ahquid  mi- 
hi de  amico,  dicere  poffit.  Reipondet  fe  quoque  expedare  hominem, 
atque  admodum  mirari  tarn  diuturnam  moram,  praefertim  cum  D. 
Cregorhts^  qui  in  ipfo  Carpione  ad  vos  venerat,  fit  triduo  ante  rever- 
fus.  Ego  is,itur,  qui  nihil  prius  de  D.  Gregoni  aut  itinerc  aut  redi- 
tu noveram,  ad  ilium  refta  contendo.  G^///«tfejuscontubernahs  hu- 
maniter  me  admittit,  jubet  expe^iare  D.  Dodorem,  et  ad  ilium  ac- 
cerfendum  currit.  Sed  cum  diutius  moraretur  ,  ego  jam  dilceffurus, 
video  D.  Gregorium  feorfum  cum  ipfo  colloquentem  ^  etmetorvo 
vultu  intuentum.  Saluto  ilium  &:  gratulor  reditum,  ac  demum  de 
vobis  incorrogo.  lUe  refpcndet  fe  nihil  quicquam  de  vobis  aut  re- 
bu?  veftris  fcire ,  nee  vobifcum  fuiffe.  Tunc  ego  ahquantuluni 
haereo  ,  ac  tandem  dico,  fi  noht  quicquam  dicere  me  aequo  animo 
laturum ,  fed  jam  mihi  conftarc  eum  vobifcum  fuiffe  :  Ille  Itoma- 
chatur  veftrumnomen  ,  ac  totius  mundi  fallacias  8c  impofturas  :  di- 
cit  fua  fibi  effe  curae ,  non  veftra  vos  multa  quidem  promittere,  kd 
parum  praeftare  ,  nefcire  fe  quare  conqueramini  :  fe  per  fefqui  an- 
num, vana  ipe  la6:atum,  vobis  ad  ha;fiffe  ,  ut  aliquod  c  minoribus 
veftris  arcanis  dirceret,nec  quicquam  aUcujus  momenti  percepiffe. 

M  m  Hie- 


44^     ^- 


>yf  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AUions.with'fftrity^cy 


Hie  ego  :  an  parviim  tibi  vidctur  arcanum  illud  contra  lucm  vene- 
rcani  ?  Ulc  vero,  Tubridens,  a  £>.  ScontOj\n(\mt ,  longe  praeftantio^ 
rem  habeo.  Dcnique,  his  omiflls,  librnm  mcum  Pt^/c/Z^' repeto  r  IT- 
le  ncgat  ie  habiiilie  interrog.ita  quo  audiverim  ^  ac  me  laudante  D. 
D<?e,ille  rurfus  negat  fe  vidilici  nili  forte,inquir,  ex-manibus  D.  Se- 
'venbergiij  vis  dicere  librum  neicio  qucm  fine  titulo  :  ac  dcniqiie  dp 
reftituendo  nulla m  Ipcm  facit.  Ego  qui  cum  iiio  verba  commutare 
nollem,  abeo  :  ac  puerum  veftrum  Staniflattm^  in  atrio  ofFendo,&  ab 
illo  intelligo  ,  vos  Erfordiam  ufque  cum  D.  Gregorio  &  D.  Carpione 
venillcjante  oftiduum  .  D.  Carpioncm  illinc  B amber ga.m  did Qyiigcndda 
neicio  quas  pecunias,profe6^um',  fe  cum  D  Gregorio^  hoc  vciijflc.In- 
terrogo  an  literal  aut  aliquod  verbulum,  a  vobis,  ad  me,  ferreti  rc- 
fpondct,  nihil  prori'us,  quia  forte  putabant,  inquit,  tc  hie  non  effe: 
(c  poft  triduum  aut  quatriduum  ad  vos  reverfurum.Laudo  ejus  con- 
filium,  &  conftantiam  in  fcrviendis  Dominis,  ac  docco  meas  aedes^ne 
fine  meis  Uteris  ad  vos  veniat :  promittit  fe  non  difccffurum,  me  in- 
falutato  D.Gregorins  interim  pcTcipit,  me  cum  eo  colloqui ,  atque 
iratus  (quantum  ex  voce  clamantis  judicare  polTum)  puerum  revo- 
cat.  Ego,  cogitabundus,  difccdo.  Die  quintodecimo  hujus  menfis, 
tandem  na£tus  fervulum  vefirum  Stafiiflaiimjin  locolibero,  eum  ac- 
euratiusde  vcflris  rebus  ac  ftatu  examino  ,  atque  non  fine  magna  a- 
ninii  mei  voluptatc,  audio  vobis  conccffas  ciU  ampliores  aedes.lUuft. 
D.Langra'vium  prxftantiflimo  D.  Dee  multum  tribuere  ut  favere, 
&  fummo  Deo  pro  tanto  munere  magnas  gratias  ago,atque  puerum 
ad  meum  cubiculum  duco  oftendoquc  illi  litcras  ad  vos  paratas,  nc 
fine  iplis  ad  vosrevcrtatur.  Sed  paulo  poftea  pater  Carpionk  me  mo- 
net,  le  velJe  ante  noctem  ,  ad  vos  unicum  exprclfum  mittere  &  ut 
fcribam  li  vcJim  :  nam  fe  a  D.  Kelleomomtnm  hoc  mihi  fignificarc: 
ingentes gratias  ago  D. helleo  c^iu  mei  non  fit  omnino oblitus  ,  & 
hsec,  perhunc  quern  vobis  fpero  hdem  nuncium  ,   fignificare  ftatuoi', 
fcripturui,  rurlus  per  Stanijlaiim^  fi  operae  pretium  videbitur. 

Oro  vos  atque  obteftor  per  Deum  ilium  vivum,qui  Autor  eft  no- 
ftrae  amicitiae,  &  qui  difcrte  praeccpit  ut  nos  invicemac  mutuo  ame- 
mus,  ne  oblivilcamini  mei  cum  datur  vobis  occafio  invigendi  me  per 
literas  aut  per  inter  nuncios,  &  reddendi  me  ccrtiorem  de  ftatu  ve- 
ftrarum  noftrorumque  rerum  \  nam  ego  certevcftri  non  oblivifcar, 
&  officia  mea  id  teftibuntur,non  folum  coram  Deo,fed  etiam  coram 
omnibus hominibus.  Si  vcftcr  rcditus  aliquandiu  differetur  ,  invifam 
vos  "proximo  mcnfe  Scptenibri^  longe  enima  vobis  vix  vivere  poffuni, 
immo  \\  proprie  loqucndum  fit ,  me  vitae  taedct :  Ac  pra;fens  agafld 
de  nonnuilis  rebus  quas  fcribere  minime  decet. 

Jam  elapfi  fiint  1 8  dies  ex  quo  llluftrifllmum  'Nuncium  Apofioli- 
cum  non  vidi,  &  Cum  fatis  fupcrquc  fatisfccerim  obedientiaE,non  ad- 
ibo  ilium,  nc  verba  nobis  dare  fitbi  tam  facile  fore  perfuadeat.  Ofien- 
dit  literas  D,  Dee  Legato  Vcneto  d^*  Florentino  ^  uterine  mihi 

fum" 


i^trHe9{elation  ofDt  Dee  his  AUiom,  mthj^iritSy  &c.    445 


fummopere  cos  landdrvity  dixit  que  fibi  <z>ifus  difertas  grat/es^  <^pliif- 
qnam  i>nlgaris  jfiritus^  d^  vpiffint  exemplum  illamm  ,  fed  caro  of- 
ferre  non  potcram,  &:  dubito  ne  Illuftriftimus  'Nuncim  cas  tuppri- 
mat  5  namhaudoblcurej  innuit/e  timere  'vejintm  congrejfum  prx- 

fertim  ^quitm  (^  rationale^  Sc  id  quaererc  videtur,  ut  vobiibiim  aac- 
re  poffit  more  tiijp-  ^^c-  D.  Joan.  Carpia^  nondum  revcrtitur,  Sc  D. 
Rojenbergim  eras  dicitiir  diiccffarus  Sc  ncfcio  an  lecupcrare  potcro 
litcras  ad  cundcm  Carpionem^  in  quibus  dc  pccuniolis  illi.  ajjebatur, 
fi  dubicatii  ne  illc  diutius  quam  par  lie ,  lolutionem  dilicrat  quxlo 
curetis,  ut  aliquo  alio  modo  mihi  profpiciatur.  D.  ab  Ojp,  per  ao 
(dies,  non  vidi,  ac  Jeiuitis  palam  dixi  &  dico  quandocunque  occafio 
fe  ofFert,  i/ohis  futinm  ab  ipfis  injlgnem  injur iam^  cos plm  pendcre  ab 

\  anlis  terrejiribus  quam  a  calejii  :  timire  collationem  ofqiiam  cum  'z/o~ 
his^ac  JHX  caufx  annnm  hand  obfcnrc  r//J//^erc,itaque  jam  ium  cis  mi- 
nus gratus. 

Saluto  uxorem  D.  Dee  le£ii{llmam  foeminam  ,  ac  mihi  non  mi- 
nus quam  matrem  venerandam  i  nccnon  conjugem  D./CeZ/eirarum 
exemplum  juvenilis  fan^Htatis  ,  caftitatis  ,  atque  omnium  virtu- 
tum.  Saluto  omnes  j  alios  veftros  domefticos  landos  vofquc  in- 
primis  D.D.  Joan.  &  Ed.  defidcrabilia  mihi  nomina  foehces  ac  bea- 
tos  in  Domino  cupio  ac  pcecor.  Quantum  tribuam  &  tribuere  de- 
beam  veftris  precibus  noftis,eis  oro  atque  obfecro  me  apud  D.Deum 
juvetis  ut  vocation!  meae  refpondeam,  &  curfum  meum  hilari  animo 
ac  firmo  corpore  perficiam.Sanfiiflimus  ille  pater,  qui  nobis  jam  luf- 
citavit  paftorem  ilium  magnum  D.  Jefum  filium  fuum  mox  reverfu- 
rum  ad  lubigendos  omnes  innimicos  ejus  fub  pedibus  fuis,  atque  cx- 
tremam  manum  impofiturum  renovationi  rerum ,  nos  omnes  fuo 
fpiritu  fovcat  ac  recreet,ut  Lati  adventum  ejus  praeftolari,atque  nu- 
ptialibus  voftibus ,  lampadibufque  accenfis  ornati ,  ipfi  occiyrrcre 
poflimus.  Praga  xif  Kal.  O^ob.  M.D.  Lxxxv. 


Idem  Dominationibus  i/ejirk  addiBijfitts 

Atque  ex  animo  frater 

PUCGIUS 

Pr.€ftantijpmJ6  ac  Deo  dileBis  t/irk  D.D. 
Joannes  Dec.  ^  Eduardo  Kelleo  Gene 
rofis  Anglis,  ac  Majoribus  in  Chrijio  fra- 
trtbm^  mihi,  tanqnam  fatribus  coleTidiSy 

Mw  3  ^^t 


r444    ^ ^^^^ relation  oft>r.  Dee  his  ABims, mtb  joints. 8ic. 

MgnificcDotnine;8i  u:i  pater  amandlTimc&  oblcrvande  nonminori  etiam  defiderio  teneorvi- 
dendi  &  de  multis  coUoqucndi  cum  Magnifica  dominature  veftradc  cujus  crga  me  &  fide,  &  a,morc 
nunquam  dubitavi  nee  dubicarcpoflum  pott  prandiumhora  commoda  ego  illam  accedam.  Deus  fua, 

gratia  fcmper  nobis  adfic. 

Vefter  ex  animo,  GuilielmHs  propria  manu. 

Febr.  lO.    1587,  ftil&novo.  Trehone. 

Poftridc  reditus  llluftriffimi  a  Vienna  ad  TrehonMm', 


4-    ^ 

Sir,My  hearty  commendations  unto  you  defiring  your  health  as  my  own  ,  my  Lord  was  exceeding 
glad  of  your  Letters,  andfaidnow  Ileehc  lovcth  me  ,  and  truly  as  faras  I  perceive  he  loveth^is 
heartily.  This  Sunday  in  the  Name  of  the  Bleffed  Trinity  I  begin  my  Jourpey ,  wherein  I  com- 
mend me  unto  your  prayers,  defiring  the  Almighty  to  fend  his  fortitude  with  me.  I  commend  me 
unto  Mrs.  Dee  a  thoufand  times ,  and  unto  your  little  babes  :  wifhing  my  felf  rather  amongft  you, 
then  elfewherc,  I  will  by  Gods  grace  about  twenty  dayes  hence  return,  in  the  mean  leafon  all  com- 
fort and  joy  be  amongrt  you ; 

)Trage,  ICoHT  affnrcd  attdint' 

\\!!  iLu^yii  mo'veable  friend. 

KThomas  Kelly.  ^  1?      iT   H 

tl^rancis  Gariaud.       >went  with  him.  £•    Ivelly. 

.Ferdinando  Hern)\.  j 

To  the  Right  PTorjhipfu/, 
and  his  ajfured  friend  Mr. 
John  Dee  £J quire  ,  give 
theft, 

CMagnifleii  Domino^  '^ 

'Domino  Dee. 

Received  of  Lo^iowe;^  in  the  High-way  by  P/^fz,,  in  the  middle  way  between  New-hoftfe  and 
Trehn^  as  I  was  comming  ivom  New-houfe  .^  whither  I  went  to  have  met  my  Lord  as  he  came 
itomVtenna :  But  Arch-duke  £r»*/?  was  occafion  (as  was  thought)  that  they  rfiould  go  to  Prtige 
by  Triegle ,  being  the  more  even,  although  not  the  next  way  :  I  received  them  on  Friday  the  6  of 
Februarj^  and  they  weredeiiyetedhimat  P^-i^g*  onSunday  was  afeven-night  before  >  being  the 
25  oi  January^  novo  ft  Ho. 

5wff£rfrt  I  commend  me  unto  you.  hoping  in  God  that  you  are  in  good  health,  as  I  and  my 
children,  withallmy  Houlholdamhere,  I  praifc  God  for  it  j  I  have  none  other  matter  to  write 
unto  you  at  this  time. 

I  being  at  New-honfe  from  Trebone,  (to  go  to  underftand  wliich  way  my  Lord  Rofenberg  ^ould 
go  from  Vten  to  Prage  and  when,)  and  this  Letter  being  in  the  lame  day  brought  from  Pritge, 
my  wife  fent  ZrO^owci^with  it,  toward  me,  andlo  without  i'/<«f«.  Town  in  the  High-way  he 
gave  it  me. 

-J-  Trehone  in  Bohemia, 

Vtjitationu  Secunda  ,  A^io  infiitutA, 

Anmiiit  ^  Prcces  ad  Diem  fudi  ,  and  declared  that  we  here  and  now  prefented  our  felves,  as  in  obe- 

DkiaSep-  dience,  according  to  the /imeprefcribed  of  fix  Moneths  end,  hnce  the  laftgood  Friday:  I  craved 

icfibris.  pardon  of  all  our  ciTors  and  mifdecds  5  fince  the  laft  time  of  his  vifiting  us ,  and  now  requefted  his 

pje  Veneris  aid  and  dircdion  hence-forward  to  walk  profpcroufly,  according  to  the  well  pleafing  of  his  divine 

jrxn  menfis  Majeltie ;  and  that  he  would  grant  unto  JViUiAm  Rofenberg^  E,  K.  and  me  his  graces  ,  fo  abun- 

'l-isante%af^hii  '^^"^^7 >  that  in  US  his  honour  might  be  increafed ,  and  glory  advanced  mightily  and  trium- 

'■imeridiehora  phantly,&c. 

*•  E.  K.  Here  is  a  round  fire  like  a  Sunne. 

^'^^  ttf*f»  Frigida  pr<eparatio.  , 

Frigida  oratio. 
Frtgidam  hoc  exiguntrefjf&nfum. 

Jitvtrffufe  tAmtn Guli^lmo,medi4tortm&  agnHm,  refpondere paratHmy  fsnfHlite, 


(^true  9{elation  of  Dr,  Dee  bis  Actons,  n?ithj}irirs^^c7~44^ 


E.  K.  He  is  gone  now. 

A  Tu  juftus  es  Dominc,  &  nos  impii :  tu  CznSius  cs  Domine,  &  viae  :\ix  immaculacy  :  nos  ncc 
orare, neque nos  prsparare  fine  tuoauxilioSc  gratia  unquampoffiaius:  Tuam  igitiir  A)b;sccnccdas 
gratiam,  Sc  de  tanto errore lioltro  dignam  3g:te  pocnitcni:  a;ii,  ut  agiuim5&  mediacorem  nolhiim  om- 
ri  tempore  nobis  inveniamus  propuium  ex  tua  chm:ncia ,  "illius  m.-iuis,  &  Ipiritus  cui  Sandi  afflatu 
conlolatorio^   Amen. 

Cui,Trino  Scuni,  Deovcro,  ScOmaiporcntij  ;ic  fempiceriius  honor;  liu-;  pcrcr.nis,  <k"\ou3. 
pcrpetiia.  Jmtn> 

*»    I  I       I  ..11.  .--—■-. —     _ _ — , ^ — . _ ^ i.  ^ ^ 

=  +    Xfehonc^    A^ia  Secu»d4  ex  fefcm. 

'Anno   1586. 
O3ob.   14.    Tuefday.    UMane- pofi  Joli^  ertum.  ' 

Circa  7.  Trecthns  fftfis^  gr^tiifque  aElis  fra  mifericordiis  1)i'  t^jinitii  erga  n»s  tarn  in  prxd.  - 
pittatiotte  (J  :intinex$cutioKey  ifipatriit,  inmAri  ■,  &  in  hue  pcreq^rinatwae  ^  O*  pro  libirM'.one  no- 
firtiexmanibHs  hofltHM  inVxzotri^extlio.,  &profna  continna  tute.'a  •,&  pro  rcdnHfoKe  nojlr^ 
cnm  honore& gloria  initio^  tidq-Aietem  &  fecitritatem  £•««»  Williclmo  Rorciibcrgiojy<«w« 
lehamusqitidiffe  pottjfimum  nobis propouere  velit  ex  ftiu  m^'ficrtus  -^  &  quid  de  [^iiccio  ejfet  Jla- 
tHcndum  ,  cjtiid  de  &  operihw  Pt:'ilo[ophicis  j.'txta  ejtis  propoJitfUft,   ($"  (jttioL  de  errore 

inpraEiica  nuper faEiafit jiatuendum^  &c)tiidprxtereAnobisiar,i&pr£CtpHefic^afiendnm,  ()• 
ad  Wilhhelmum  vacanditm  paratos ,  >:os  ejfc  luxta  Dei  bencp[acit^tn:^&c, 

A  I  had  let  up  KjVIenf/tm  foederis^  with  the  appurtenances  ,  and  had  let  the  Angelical  Scone  m 
the  frame  oF  Gold  on  the  Table  ,  oncly  £.  K,  and  I  being  in  the  goodly  Ittrh  Ciiappel  next  my 
Ch  amber,  appointed  to  our  ufcs. 

A  voice  ♦♦.♦^»  I^it  hint  come.,thAt  is  t3  come. 

A  I  went  tor  the  Lord  Rofenberg^  whom  I  t'ouad  in  his  Oratory  of  the  Church  hearing  ofMaffe: 
And  he  came  with  me  and  ("at  in  his  place. 

E.  K.  I  fee  a  great  plain  like  unto  a  field  ,  as  though  it  were  a  ^jf»i 
Mile  over  ,  in  the  end  of  it  there  is  a  great  high  rotten  Tree  ,  all 
the  grafle  is  as  though  it  were  withered  and  burned ,  there  com- 
''mcth  a  beam  as  of  fire  from  Heaven ,  and  lighteth  upon  the  Tree, 
now  there  commeth  water  out  of  the  root  of  the  Tree  ,  as  though 
it  were  a  Sea,  and  fpreadeth  all  the  plain  over  :  And  the  Tree  open- 
eth  and  there  commeth  a  Man  out  of  it,  his  hair  hangeth  down 
unto  his  girdle  ftead,his  garment  covereth  him  down  from  his  fhoul- 
ders,  and  hangeth  behind  him  down  upon  the  water. 

The  earth  hath  now  drunk  up  all  the  water,  and  the  Man  ftan- 
deth  upon  the  dry  ground. 

All  the  place  is  full  of  green  graffe  about  a  cubit  high. 

Now  the  Man  is  out  of  light. 

It  feemed  to  be  as  beyond  and  without  the  Stone. 

The  Vifion  is  clean  dif-appeared. 

^  I  expounded  this  Vilion  in  Latin  to  the  Lord  Rofenberg. 

E.  K.  In  the  middeft  of  the  Stone  feemeth  to  ftand  a  little 
round  thing  like  a  fpark  of  fire  ,  and  it  increafeth  ,  and  ieemeth  to 
be  as  bigge  as  a  Globe  of  20  inches  Diameter,  or  thereabout. 

Vox  .„..„  lVobeMntothemirld.^wobeHntotheiyorIdyaKdlVvrldltn^s  :  Wo  he  unto  JOH  So>ines 
cf  men,  for  joft  are  withered  ,  and  b.hold  the  field  of  the  Lord  bringeth  yon  not  forth  :  Joh  are  de 
filed,  and  bemg  defiled,  joh  defile  alfo  the  beauty  of  jour  Se^t :    A^d  behold,  behold,  behold,  (/  , 

,  fay,)  you  that  are  the  King  and  Princes  of  the  Earth  tjed  andknit  together  ttfonone  flemme,  you 
are  allrotten  and  barren  ,  behold,  yon  brii^g  forth  no  fruit  •  but  even  as  the  graffe  that  vnithereth^ 
he  is  a  dif-glory  to  the  place,  even  fe,  are  you  that  is  graffe ,  ofyourfituatioH  and  drvclUng,  f)r  be- 
hold, you  have  no  leaves,  mucblejfe  fruit  :  m,  xvo,  wo,  unto  finch  a  generation  ,  rrhich  lacketh 
ntoifiure,  and  the  fire  ef  comfort :  7  hefi-imme  that  carrieth  you  is  the  Seat  and  hd)  place,  which 
alfo  is  contaminated,  tyfndlo,  behold,  (as  it  were)  withered;  tfhlmejfe  be  hidden  whereupcn  i^c  us  [annus 
jmjtatid  y  how  wicked  are  thofc  thst  are  governed  by  you  ,  how  wid^^  "re  youy  and  how  abomina-  cjtr.mi/iatuu' 


44^    ^  ^^^^  r^t^tion  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  AUions^  mtb^irits^SLC, 


hie  :  hevf  fuli  of  corruption  are  joh  that  fi and  vnithout  all  beauty^  moi^itrc,  or  comfort :  The 
time  fhallcomt  rA/tr  f/>f  ^lowfr  4»(imiiih:  of  God  which  here  fpeaktthamongft  you,  in  che  fire  and 
fpinc  ot  his  hply  truth  fhall  came  down  from  ahove^  from  Heaven^  from  the  Seat  of  comfort ,  from 
the  evtrUfliKgThrone^  aidjhailftilldowfiy  not  into  p»,  nor  atnongft-  yot*{fory»u  fhafl  l/e  rooted 
out,  )  ^Ht  into  theftemme  and  into  the  root  rrhich  is  the  helj  place,  and  the  houfe  of  comfort :  y^nd 
l>ehold,  the  power  of  God,  (of  him  that  fpeakjth)  (hall  be  mi^htj,  firong  ,  and  of  iiffirtirt  porter: 
So  that  likf  a  hf^oman  rviih  (^hild,  (he  \ha!lhrin^  forth  in  the  Church  of  ^od,  a  man^  clothed  with 
«  white  ji;ar  me  nt :  which  is  JUSTICE  uiii'potced  ,  which  rriay  walk^with  trifi^ite  p$wer  {and 
m  the  Garment  of  holtveffe  and  beauty^')  y.pon  the  abundance  of  graces-,  and  the  waters  bf  comfort^ 
■which  Jhall  flaw  out  of  the  holy  Seat. 

And  behold,  6  you  Sonnes  of  men-  yon  [kail  be  full  of  underflanding  ,  and  of  the  fpirit  of  tfif' 
dome  ,  and  the  grace  of  God ,  {*f  him  that  fpeaketh  with  yon)  [hall  beplemtful  andfirong  amongjt 
yoit  :  So  that  yoH  [hall  fpring,  and  beatit'fie  the  Earth  and  the  Boufe  of  Chnjl :  ^nd  beheld,  tht 
h\"\\crhou<^hcs,and  mighty  branches  jhall  lofe  their  vcrtHe  ^  and  be  cafl  down,  becattfe  thej  have 
placed  them  fclves  upon  the  outward  rotten  Stock^y  to  the  di[honour  of  htm  that  hath  called  them: 
and  there  \hAllno  more  firength  or  i/ert»e  be  amongfl  you  :  b:it  you  fhall  be  fubjeH  to  verity,  and  be 

^uando  Hie-     ctmrouhd  with  an  iron  rod,  by  him  that  came  out ,  and  walked  on  the  waters  :   Then^all  be  peace 

rufalendef-       andrefi'.    Then  (hall  HierufAlem  defcend. 

eeadet.  ^    j^    Now  is  all  dif-appearcd  away  oiu  of  fight. 

A  I  lead  thi  touner  parcv:!  in  Latmc  to  the  Lord  '\njenberg- 

A  Paufe. 

A  Tu  jiiHusc?  Dxjminc,  &  Judicia  tui  vcr3,tuomnipotens6  Deus  nolier,  Jcbrachiotuo  nuUus 
rcfiitercp  >ceft.  Vcm,6  DominC)&  confolare  nos  veiitate  &  JuHitia. 

£.  K.  Now  he  is  returned  again  in  the  form  he  went  away  in. 
A  red  croffe  commeth  over  it,  pure  red,  fo  yellowi(h. 

A   Paui'c. 

^dizinnitrc-         So  that  the  Name  of  the  God  ot  RighteoufncfTe  ,  and  of  his  Sonne  Chrift  fliallbe  magnified  in 

jemijii)  >n       tj^„e:   §  And  h,  behold,  bf  my  fetf,  I  [wear  that  after  a  few  Moncths  the  umz  expired;  I  will 

/inglix  iutuYt.  j^^if^^  ^^^  breaks  the  half  placcy  fo  that  there  Oiall  be  no  abomination  in  it. 

,j^^'j_  §   And  behold,  the  ends  of  the  tVorldfhall  be  opened-,  and  all  peophfh-tUrejoyce  in  the  Crtfft  and 

Tiui mnv.di       Name  of  the  Lamb. 

de-rtinuuy.  §  But  [irfl  commeth  terronr  to  all  fiations.    §  Wo^  wo,  the/ef ore  be  unto  jou,  o  yoit  Kings  and 

TerriiiiitpyiM.  Princes  of  the  Earth  \  he  that  hath  eares  let  him  hear. 

Andlo,  behold -y  this  day  lam  defcended,  and  my  prontife  is  upon  him  that  hetreth  M' 

aimngfi  you. 
, ,..  Let  him  mitigate  therefore  fhe  fragility  of  humane  reafon-,  and  give  me  a  dwelling  place  by 

r'sbaz  faith:  far  f  willthisdaymak.e  a  ^avenant  with  him ,  ft  that  my  Name  and  Spirit  fhall  not  de- 

part from  his  Houfe. 
Xofenberz  (hall        e^"''  w^'''  ^  ^^^'^^  promtfed  him  I  am,  and  I  will  bring  to  pajfe  :  what  it  he-,  or  who  is  he  that 
fjilj.  laughrth  me  to  fcoin  ,  that  {if  he  repent  not)  receivtth  not  his  reward  ? 

And  moreover,  I  will  appea  r  to  him  hereafter,  and  he  fhallbe  partaker  of  the  caleftial  my  fiery, 
if  my  Name  be  exalted  in  him. 
Andbeho'd-)  he  fhati  often  fall,  but  he  fhall  rife  agaifs,  andjhallperfcvtre  untethiend. 

E.  K.  It  is  dif-appeared. 

A  Legi  ultimamhanc  particulam  Latine  ipfi  Principi  Rofenbergio. 

A  Paufe.  » 

E.  K.   In  lapidejietit  fcriptitm.   Afcer  an  hour. 

A  Wc  removed  not,  butlat  ItiUand  difcourK'd  partly  upon  the  prcmiires,  and  partly  of  Englanis 
mifcry  tocome. 

K.  K.  There  appcarcth  a  little  white  cloud ,  like  the  end  of  a 
cloud  ,  with  a  dark  image  of  a  face  of  three  in  one  :  fometimes  ap- 
pearing three,  fometimes  one. 

The  end  of  the  white  cloud  doth  wave  up  and  down  before  the 
,.  ,  .   face. 

this  Kingdom.      Vox  ex  latere  lapidis Thefefour  Moneths,  letVJ  i\\i!Lm(for  afmuch  as  i»himlyeth)abfiain 

Of  the  firft,      from  Prage  ,  for  he  [hall  deceive  thofe  that  are  deceivers. 

y>de  ^4. 1 587       Two  winds  (hall  arifefrom  the  Earth  within  thefe  next  yeares  in  this  Kingdom  ;  /« the  firfi  let 

AaitneKehm-  himfitfiill:  In  the  fecond  let  him  arm  himfelf  i  and  refifi  wlhVi&ory, 

Mm.  16,  t.  il. 


j^J^trnerelarm  of  Dt. Dec  bis  A&iem,n^ithfprits,  Sec:'  ^'47 

bni.  K'  There  appcareth  a  Wood,a  great  Wood  on  the  left  hand" 

fey  a  River :  There  be  two  like  Hawks,  whereof  one  is  white  ,  and 

the  other  is  black  :  The  one  is  on  a  bough  in  the  water,  that  is  the 

yack,  the  other  on  a  withered  bough  on  the  land. 

L"''"A  great  Bear  commeth  out  of  the  Wood. '"", .  ^^  .  ..  ,,„  f.isp,mui. 

Now  he  runneth  toward  them,  he  catcherhtheblack  one  in  the* 
water,and  fwalloweth  him,  and  ftandeih  up  upoa  his '  hinder  leg?  ■' 
Now  he  goeth  to  the  other,  and  fliakcrh  him  in  his  mouth,  and  Aan- 
deth  up  on  his  hinder  legs  :  and  hath  pulled  off  both  his  Wings,  he 
returneth  into  the  Wood  again  ,  the  body  of  the  white  lycth  on* 
the  ground.   Now  he  turneth  his  feet  up. 

Now  he  ftandeth  on  his  legs  again. 

He  followeth  the  Bear  the  fame  way  he  went,  he  would  lift  up 
hiinfelf  as  if  he  would  fly,  but  he  cannot. 

All  this  Wood,  Bear,  and  two  Fowles  are  vanillied. 
•-  ■£.  A;  Below  ftandeth  a  great  Cafi:le,at  the  foot  of  the  Hill  on 
which  that  Wood  did  ftand,  down  in  a  valley  from  the  Hill  goeth  a 
great  high  Bridge  of  Stone  long  (in  fight)  about  ten  Englifli  miles 
long. 

Befide  the  entrance,  on  the  right  hand  of  that  Caftle,   is  like  a 
piai,  with  motions  coeleftial  in  it,  of  Sunnc  and  Moon. 

Now  commeth  a  Bear  ,  (black  as  the  other)  a  very  2;rca|?mon-    .r  r 
ftrous  Bear.   The  Bridge  quaketh  under  him  as  he  pafi'eth  it  toward ''w- 
the  Caftle  he  roareth,  lookingtoward  the  Caftle.  I^e  fteppcth  up  to 
the  Dial,  and  taketh  the  Moon  out  of  it,  and  tearcth  it  all  in  pieces 
with  his  teeth.  The  Caftle  falleth  ,  and  the  bridge  where  he  ftand- 
eth is  broken.  The  Caftle  is  all  in  ruine. 

The  Bear  ftandeth  upon  the  edge  of  the  bridg,andbeholdeth  the 
ruine  of  the  Caftle  down  into  a  pit  as  it  were. 

Now  he  goeth  back  and  the  biidg  falleth  down  after  him. 

Now  the  Wood  appearech  again,  and  he  goeth  into  the  Wood. 

Now  that  Vifion  is  all  vaniihed  away. 

Vox  .,.,.,  Totcfiy-fli  l^ortlj  fee^agaxnft  wifac  fione  l^acci  Ltth  fpHrncd. 
My  Peace  and  bUffing  he  uwn  Jo;'.. 

JE.  K.  Now  all  is  gone  away. 

A  Gloria,  bus,  honov,  Benccii0.^io  &  Jubilacio  fic  Deo  Patri,  Deo  filio,  &  Deo  Spiritui  lanilo  : 
ficut  erac  in  piincipio ,  &  nunc;&  in  fcmpicerna  Ixculotumlscuia.   <iAmen. 

Spiritu  principaji  confirma  nos  Deus,  Deus  nolter  confirmet  nos  Deus,Omnipo:ens,  Scinpitcrns 
vive  &  vere.    ^me»,  Amen^  Amen- 


(Jf-f  £  M  &'EiA  N  nil  M. 
Anno  I  5  8(5.  Oilobrh  Die  ^  ■]>  a  meridie,  pojt  novas  cum  Fr.  Puccio  turhas  &  rixat ,  prop- 
\e.r  pecamas  cjttascHptebat  a  mbis  habere^  ex  /ibera/ttate,  &  in  tiomtae  Dri,  ctr  t:zi(^iiam  a  fervtf 
©«  C^noaab  Ed.vardoKlho  ta^eju^.m  nb  Edwardo  Kcll:o  ,  «5X  [ A  ^- E.  K  j  cn>?clnftMUS 
(adfcandAl.\ntHlraevitarMquAiff;coatraKosfparferat&  exco^itavertit ^  propter  pecunias  e'tis 
80Q  Florenorum,  Dee  cbUtas  &  redditas  per  tiitim,  &prim  recufatiu  tjnando  nos  Hit  folvere  pa- 
rati  eramM,&  6  X  o  Dncatos  ilU  exhibHiwHi  coram  Deo,  m  inde  acciperet  ^uod  fnum  ejfe  iudica^ 
bat.)  Concl!*Jtmtts  ini^ftamy  (ctmbonafp^ ,  (jUidnonofcHdcremHs  Deur^)  ameillum^  coramte- 
JiibHs-,  ex  potter  e  numerUTK^oc  ¥loteno\um:  &  ft  ftbi  debetiaffereret  .^  qvodrecipert  pofet^fi  vel- 
let',  fin  vera  negaret%oo  Florenos,  a>it  aliqitam  fibi  ancbis  deberi  pecaaiam  ,  Tuftc  &  idetiam 
sorxm  tefiibtis  pronHMtatum  volebamnSj  tefiimovio,  &  chirogrttpha  civjcripto  natam fdcerc  tempo-. 
Hhm  &  {acts  opportHftiis.  " 


"^     '^J^rue  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Aaions,witbfprits,^c. 

"  tx  Arcol-vimiis  mtur  ad  Primatts  Domum. ,  &  coKVocMts aliquot  Ctvibusfrimmis,  Sacerdo- 

tefedme,  &  aU^mt  fcr>b,s  Illnftru  fHmmiPrtf,c,fis  (D<7W*«i  Rolenbergu)  duos  magno*  faccos 
Jcuniarum  exrolluirr.us,  &  ex  (ubi  duo  mill  .a  ducatorunn,  &  pr3:t-.ca  pluves  quam  4O0  Dolen  numc- 
rabaiKur  lupra  meiilam, 800  Fl ^icni :  Et  'DtUmntMt  Hit  propofna  {<j^odfupertHsa»mu-v>) pecnnias 
Accipere  cLenws crat  ,  fed  ,lle  volmt  [ubfcrtbne,[e  accepijfc  in  nonnne Dei ,  &  a  noh^  tanc^uam 
AfervisDei.  Nos  vero  protefi^bamttr  ms  nut lo  mode  recipere  t»ms,  ut  aD^o  hoc  »obts  ejjctin- 
iLanrndiccremHS,  »t  Hit  illas  proponeremw  pecu»iai,  velaccipicndas,velrecufA^.ias  abtllo  :  Sed 
tamnm  ad  evitrnd^i  magna  &  multafcand^U  cotitra  nos,  ill  'aw  tbvdim  bbcro  commn- 

tere  arbitrto  ,  Ht  ill  &  dtcat  ,  ^nod  dU  videretur  melim  ,  &  ilh  ejjer  gr  Ac 

cepit  erjro  pecumai,  nytmeravtt,  &  indecfi  coftfcyifttfm  Chirogrpahum  mam  [cnbe  fummt 

fnntt}ts  (Pauli  Woltgi  prAfenits cum  diver fn  uftibm,  <jnt [na  mmtna  fubfcrtpferunt ,  Mtf/tpfo 

Chtrographoapparepotefi.  ,.    ■        ■  ■     t    ■  ww 

t-  •  r      c         'Deo  aratia!  a/ramus.  Speramm  emm^  melton  nos  jam  qHtctefrtiimos  :  &  ma- 

t  ranCllCUS    „,j ^r^^; i,l,g^g^  ^t  e]M  U^igna  venenata  &i»qttieta  Dem  tllum  convertat  :  &  tlli 
Puccius.        fit  propittHs ,  Aique  dixit  mbn  fe  velie  m  nc  mwifirtim  facial^  fn*  dtvinx  Maje- 
ftati  Htilem  in 

4"    frebone.    oyinno   1587. 

'Die  5  Jamarii  ai.  mane  hor.  9. 

A  TcmpusbeneplicJu,etUempusopporcunum 

Neceffltas  Mon  habet  Legem. 

A  In  nomine  pauis  &  F.&  SS.&c  Pater  nolier,&c.  Omnipotcnsfempiterne  vere  &  uneDeus  in 
^Amouxxmm  C.E.K.UmzxJoaKKesDce^vata^d.^c. 

ANocbvoruponprelumprion  (O  Lord)  buc  with  tear  and  love  toward  thee  we  are  ready  to 
hear  thv  will ,  as  conceinino  the  5Wand  Ccmmandtmcnt  ,  now  at  Vrage  m  this  moneths  be- 
"innm^^  made  to  £.  A'.  Webelecvc  and  hope  it«/o/;/;<r,  and  that  thou  wik  not  tempt  us,  or  lutter 
us  to  beVemptcd  m  lb  wc.ghry  a  cale,  And  therefore  being  not  perkaiy  into,  med  in  r^.y.  ty.o  ounces 
of  poivder  E  TC  Knowedr  not  how  to  do/eeing  at  his  return  hither  he  miiTcth  an  half«u>ice  thereof 
whe^hec  n'lali  he  ot  the  refidue  make  up  that  halt  ounce  wanting,  or  no  ?  we  will  or  dare  propound 
to  make  agy  compleat  adion  :  but  therein  reterre  all  co  our  Parliament  daycs,  or  principal  ofdinary 

aftionsaffigned. 

tJ[{orainterpsfua,partehor£\. 

E.  K.  Here  appear  Letters  if  I  could  read  them ,  thus  they  arc. 

♦  .,..»   Aliii!,'ta.&  a  me.  .  n         it  1  J 

E.  K.  They  icem  white  Letters  — of  greemfli  yellow  coloured 
figures,  in  every  figure  one  of  the  four  words,in  all  being  1 2  letters. 
E.  K,  Now  they  be  gone.  r     .      .    • 

A  I  undediand  that  the  hrft  part  of  that  my  Propcficion  is  touched  m  anfwer  oi  Mtht ,  that  il, 
to  God,  the  fervicc  required  is  to  be  done  :  and  ita  ^  *  w^ ,  fo  is  the  mcffage  or  commandment 
from  the  fame  our  God. 

A  Mora  intcrpoficahorar  parte  i.  j      r     r 

E  K.  Now  is  here  other  writing,  thus,  Clanatte,  clauj^junt. 

.  A   I  underhand  not  this  well,  if  it  mean  no  more  to  be  taken  out  of  the  Powder,or  what  elfe. 

Now  appear  over  the  former  words,  other  words,  as  thus, 

Ceffate 
E.  K.  Over  Clandite;is  Cepte.thc  other  words  1  cannot  read  yet. 
E.  K.   Over  claitfa  funt  appeareth  di'vtmm  popofitnm  fibi  ad 
hnc  non  conjiat.  ,■■■    a. 

A  <2u  .Tigimrtibi  funt,  &ite,  nobis  funt  acceptiffima.:&  per  tc,&  propter  te.ut  nobis  injunfta 
faGiamuscuurajoDcuSjnobisparatiffimumpraebeasauxilium!  „  i-.     •  .  «r 

Tibi  Creator!  Redcmpton,  &  Sandificatori  noftro,  fit  omnis  Laus,  Honor,  &  Gioria  ,  nunc  « 
icmpcr)    Amtn. 

Ad  Omnipotmtis  Trinitatis  Laiidm,  Honorem,  &  Gloriam. 

^Kdyfieriornm  Di  vinorum  memorabilia  mi  dies 

quartus  Aprilis^  Anno  15  87,  dicatafuit, 

^  Trebom 


A  true  delation  of  Dr.  Dee  /m  Mionf,  with  Spirits,  (3cc.  • 


pr tores  ad 

''Reichftem, 

mi(fM. 


'587-     ACTIO    TERTIA. 

Trebona  Cjeneralis, 

A.  ryOjl  freces  adVeuMy  &,recitatim  Catalogum  ilium,  petitioHutu  nojlrarum  ad  emietH.  ^prUu  4' 
X    quievimus  divina  expedantes  confilia,  monita,&  oracula.  '  M^ne  circa 

8. 

Magna  paufa. 

A tandem  accept  literas  *  iitraff,  iUvfirifJimi  Powim'Rofenbergiije^'  recitavi  coram  *  lUas  cum 

VeojUteJM  obedientia,  htintiUUftf  &  defiderium,  coram  Veo  &  Angela  ejufdem  conxeflata  ejfent.  I'^-^ff^jho- 
Alia  adhuc  paufa,  five  Mora  faCta,  fed  non  lo7iga.  nibtu^ilUs 

E.K.  There  feemeth  a  black  Curtain  of  Velvet,  to  be  drawn  from 
one  fide  of  the  Stone  to  the  other.  The  Curtain  is  full  of  plights. 

There  feemed  alfo  one  to  have  defcended  from  above,  (a  good 
way  behinde  the  Curtain)  and  fo  to  go  behinde  the  fame  Curtain. 

Alia  paufa. 

Vox Happy  is  he,  whofe  minde  thirfietb  after  the  kjtowledge  of  fvch  things  at  are  fpiri- 

tual,  and  Celejlial,  offtich  things  as  are  in  the  everlajiing  place  and  glory  of  him  that  if,  and  tfMy 
andjhallhe  forever  :  for  unto  him  helongetb  reji  in  theharvefiof  the  Highefi,  and  comfort  in 
thenii.^ji  of  many  worldly  forrows.     For  unto  him,  thus  faith  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  Re(i,  Thou 
baji  rendred  my  blood  again,  with  comfort  unto  mt,  and  haji  made  a  blood  of  eternal  reji  unto  thy 
felf  for  ever.     Afcend  therefore  and  dwell  with  me,  and  receive  eternal  comfort :  for  unto  fuch 
-  behngeth  the  Kingdom  of  my  Father  ;  for  lam*  Zebaoth  unto  aU  fuch  as  truft  in  me.     But  be-  *  Reau'iei 
bold,  the  earth  hringeth  not  forth  my  mighty  praife,  becaufe  of  the  wickfdnefs  that  aboundeth  in  all  ceffatio  fah- 
■mankjiide  :  Neither  have  I  manji  fuch  children  amongH  the  fans  of  men  as  I  have  jpok^n  of  be-  batum-,&C' 
fore  ;  for  why  ?  Jhe  Giants  of  this  world  are  a  jiumbling  block,  unto  the  poor  people,  and  unto  Sabbath. 
their  fubjeSs  :  forlo,  behold,  behold  !  (I  fay)  vile  and  bafe  things  (for  that  they  are  mifufed) 
are  become  gods  within  their  houfes  :  fo  that,Goldand  Silver,  precious  Stones,  and  [oft  Apparel, 
jphich  were  wont  to  be  brought  out  of  their  houfes  to  garnifh  mine  withaU,  are  become  their  gods, 
and  the  Idols  of  their  dejirudion:  for,  who  is  be  that  exalteth  not  himfelf  in  hit  rtcbes,  andde- 
•fiifeth  me  that  was  the  Author  of  them  ?     Where  is  he  that  loveth  not  his  wife  and  children,  pomp 
and  wo.  Idly  glory,  more  than  the  fetting  in  ordtr  of  my  little  fioch^,  or  the  preferment  of  my 
glory  ?     fyho  (I  fay  J  is  he,  that  maketh  not  more  of  himfelf  than  of  me  ?  Woe  be  unto  you  that 
fo  do  :  and  woe  be  unto  the  generations  that  Jhall  foUowyou. 
^.  Be  merciflil  unto  uSj  O  God  of  Mercies. 

O  wretched  and  miferable  mankind,  look,  look  in  and  upon  thy  felf.  Haft  thou 

made  thy  felf?  or  when  thou  art  afflifted,  canft  thou  remove  thine  own  affliftion  ?    Haft 
thou  any  thing  of  thy  own,  which  my  Father  hath  not  given  thee,  through  me,  in  one 
"provident  and  eternal  will?  Canft  thou  hide  thy  felf  where  I  cannot  fee  thee  ?  or  canft 
thou  do  that  which  lieth  hid  from  me  ?  Look  again  upon  thy  felf,  and  confider  what  pa- 
rents, and  root  thou  hadft  thy  beginning  in  Nature  :  behold,  they  and  their  fathers  are 
become  the  duft  of  the  earth  ;  even  fo  fhalt  thou  do.     And  even  as  of  them  is  a  ftraight 
account  of  life  required,  even  fofhallit  beof  thee  :  for,   I  that  made  thee,  and  gave  thee 
■fcreflt/b,  made  thee  partaker  and  ufer  of  my  creatures,  led  thee  in  and  out,  gave  thee  the 
Sun  to  Ihine  upon  thee,  and  the  Moon  as  the  mother  of  your  radical  moijlure.     I  that  lifted 
thee  up,  either  to  the  honour  of  a  King,  or  Magiftrate,  and  made  thee  agovernour  over 
thy  brethren,  will  at  laft  take  a  ftraight  account  of  thee,  how  thou  haft  ufed  thy  felf  to- 
vrards  me,  and  where  thou  haft  advanced  my  Name  in  fuch  things  as  I  have  lent  thee  : 
'And  be  right  fure,  that  thou  (halt  pay,  even  the  uttermoft  farthing.     Woe  be  unto  thee, 
if  thou  make  not  a  juft account ;  miferable  (halt  thou  be  forever,  if  thy  deferts  condemn 
'  thee.  Therefore  while  thou  haft  time  and  fpace,look,  look  up  unto  me  ;  for  I  am  the  Well 
»f  comfort,  and  the  God  of  peace  ;  the  true  reward  of  rightcoufnefs  toall  (uch  as  faithfiiUy 
lovl  and  truft  me. 

ranfa. 

A.  I  read  this  over Oh  how  comfortable  are  thefe  leflbns !  Give  us  and  confirm 

unto  us  thy  graces  andblelTingSjO  God,  to  do  thy  bleffed  will  herein,  and  in  all  our  duty 
toTfardthec  whatfoever. 

^  Aaa  E.K.. 


%  A  true '  [{elation  of  Dr.  Dee  h'u  Alhons^  vpith  Spirits^  (Sec. 

E.K.  Now  the  voice  feemeth  to  come  from  him  who  flandeth  be- 

hiiidc  the  Curtain. 

Magna.  Vattfa. 

WiViam  the  fon  of  Vrfwe,  the  Lord  talkerh  with  thee  this  clay,  faying,  Wilt  tliou  that 
I  buy  a  Kingdom  for  tiiee  with  gold  or  lilver  ?  Wilt  thou  that  the  Kings  and  Princes  of 
the  earth  Ihall  laugh  the  Almighty  God  of  the  heaven  and  earth  to  fcorn  ? 

Have  I  at  any  time  preferred  (tuch  as  trult  in  me)  to  the  government  of  my  pcoplej  by 
giving  them  the  excrements  of  the  earth? 

Lotik  down  upon  my  ferv'ant  Abraham. 

Look  down  upon  his  children. 

Call  to  remembrance  my  fervant  David. 

Set  Soljmon  before  thy  eyes. 

The  Kingb^  and  Princes  of  Judab  and  of  Jerusalem, 

Conlldcrwich  ihy  felf  the  emailing  of  the  twelve  :  The  government  and  ftate  of  fuch 
as  have  been  Princes  ainongfi  the  flock  Chriltiau. 

Havethey  been  hired  or  promoted  t  Have  tky  been  lifted  v.f  hy  me  ftith  f^old  or  filver, 
cr  fuch  [ikf  trumpery^  :be  Monjiers  of  xheeurth  ?  In  neccflicy,  to  pay  Tribute  the  fifh  miui- 
ftred,  vvlierewithail  Tribute  might  be  paid  according  to  cuilom. 

In  the  calling  of  ^ir<i/.'rfw,  multiplication  of  feed  was  promifed  j  which  ^was  to  be  a 
nuilticu  lein  people,  mighty  and  great  upon  the  face  of  the  earJi. 

David  vwb  b. o  ight  in  (ihe  lealt  of  his  brethrer.)  even  to  be  King  of  Ifraely  not  by  the 
niuLiaide  of  precious  ftones,  gold  or  lilver.     A  Sling  he  haJ,  a  Satchel  with  a  few  ftones. 

SoLvt  n  was  commanded  lo  build  me  a  Temple, without  any  fum  or  ftint.  The  Apoftles 
.went  from  place  lO  place,  intending  to  teach  ;  neuher  earned  they  gold  or  lilver,  but 
oiicly  a  Itripor  bag  prepared  for  their  common  viftualsand  nounftiment. 

Many  Princes  and  Kings  have  puLlilhcd  my  Name,  without  any  promife  made  unto 
them  troii;  heaven. 

NoLwiiliftandiiig,  unto^<!r<ii&<r7«  I  have  plenty,  as  his  necellities  required:  and  unto 
hischluiv;  ,  a-i  ua^.  iiinuej. 

Uiuo  Duvid,  being  Kuig,  riches  followed  his  State  :  and  unto  his  fon  Solomon,  plenty 
bo  li  at  lioiuear.dabioaJ,  to  Luild  my  Temple. 

Unio  the  Apoides  I  gave  (in  the  time  of  the  calling  of  piy  people)  the  fpirit  of  under- 
fiar.uiir,  whereby  they  uiiuei  Hood  and  had  power  to  teach  :  And  untoluth  aslhetched 
out  Liicir  iiaiiJs  for  my  name,  I  have  abundantly  givenj  and  it  hath  been  faithfully,aud 
for  the  love  of  me  taken  in  hand. 

jB  lievc  Jhereiore  with  Abrahant^zmivilth  his  children. 

Bung  thy  ling  and  bag  before  the  people  of  the  Lord  againft  Goliah. 

Endeavor  thy  lelf  with  Solonten,  to  build  a  Common-wealth,  wherein  I  will  be  exalt* 
ed,  as  the  icrvant  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  as  his  follower. 

Go  forward,  as  thy  own  power  and  ability  Ihall  ferve  thee  :  For  thus  faith  the  Lord 
of  Hofts : 

Thou  haft  nothing  but  what  thou  haft  received  of  me :  neither  thou,  neither  thy 
father. 

Provide  therefore,  of  that  thou  haft,  which  is  mine  :  that  is  to  fay,  of  that  which  thy 
power  can  txtenaunto,  in  thine  own  faculty  and  liches,  to  fhcw  thy  goodwill  and  ready 
endeavours  in  fuch  things  to  be  brought  to  pafs,  as  thou  haft  IcaineU  of  me  :  That  is  to 
fiiy,  Neglefl:  not  the  time  of  this  thy  vilitation,  neither  delpife  this  Kingdom  wherein 
thou  fti.ilt  reign,  for  in  fodoing  I  uwell  with  tiiee  for  ever,  and  with  thy  pofterity  which 
fhall  be(in  me)  mighty,  j  When  thou  art  entred  into  it,  whatfoever  Ireafure  ihere  is  in 
viy  bo' fe^  :.r  ammgiiyouy  Take  it,  ufe  it. 
The  ufe  of  Make  thee  a  Iwordof  it  with  two  edges,  that  with  the  one  thou  maift  cut  off  the  ba- 
the Powder,   ftaids  head,  and  with  the  other  build  up  the  Monuments  and  the  houles  of  cleanlinefs, 

„  .,     codlinels,  andunderftanding  :  That  the  Eaft  ai;ain  may  flounfh,  and  that  I  may  make 

K>  um  ovt/c-         TIC  \     c  1  I,  ' 

Tu  o    ent  Hoc   ,  from  the  Sun-riling  to  his  "oini:  down. 

the  half  well   )      ^"  "^'^^  mean  fealon,  ftiall  the  Powder  which  thou  haft  tobemultiplied,tf  fxtf«(/f<f,<«ii 

IV.  R.  hath  IS  (^  multiplied  with  them  tbtt  are  fctfrt- prcp«f,that  it  may  be  apt  for  thy  ufcs,and  the  ftrength- 

to  be  mulci-  x^nins;  of  thy  faith. 

plied.  {       The  one  half  of  it  thou  flialt  keep,  as  the  perpetual  remembrance  of  me,  even  thou 

Cacfarired-    ^and  thy  pofterity. 

funt  Caefi-    J     Unto  him  that  is  thy  head,  do  thy  true  obedience  :  although  hit  heart  be  burdued  *- 

•  '■•■■f.  (gaittjt  thee,  and  thirjhth  after  thy  deJiruSien. 

TheL.So^-    ) 

t"^  j\i  a.       f^*""  behold,  thy  enemy  that  feeketh  to  devour  thy  Soul,  ccafeth  not  to  lay  mts  for  tket, 
iiiaUcr  °  *  ^^''^  *'"'*"  '""'■'^  beetme  odious  t«  common pofle.     But  the  time  (hall  Ihortly  come,  when  thou 

flialc 


A  tru9%elcition  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBions,  mth  Spirits,  6cc. 


Aith.  Now  in  the  place  of  thofe  fquarc  marks,  I  fee  two  Lions, 
tha  one  very  cxaiTtly,  and  gaping.  About  the  upper  brim  of  the  Stone 
they  appear  :  and  the  Lions  feet  be  waxen  greater  and  greater. 

I  fee  another  man  from  the  brcaft  upward.  1  can  fee  no  hair  on  his 
head. 

I  fee  a  great  company  of  {cn^  and  their  garments  skirts  fomewhat 
above  their  ankles  :  and  they  are  like  womens  kirtles  wich  gards  about 
them. 

I  fee  another  man  without  a  doublet,  in  hi  -  fhirt,  and  with  a  white 
Cloke  about  him,  hanging  his  hands  down  by  his  fides. 

A.  NoUiing  elie  efteemed  or  judged  to  be  ftiewu  in  the  Stone,  by  the  Childe,  wecea- 
fed  that  Excrcile,  and  committed  all  to  Gods  mercies. 


A.  On't'iurfday  and  Friday^  I  determined  each  of  them  two  dayes  that  the  Childe  Afrilii  i^. 
fhall  thrice  in  the  day  be  put  to  the  Exercife,  and  each  time  repeat  the  Prayer  prefcnbed 
thrice. 

A.  In  the  forenoon  I  brought  the  Childe  to  the  Exercife,  and  he  faid  as  followeth.  I. 

I  fee  two  men  with  Crowns  of  gold  upon  their  heads :  their  appa- 
rel is  black  and  white.  I  cannot  fee  their  feet.  Their  taces  are  white, 
their  eyes  ar^  black  like  fpots  of  ink. 

There  appear  now  two  other,  without  Crowns :  of  the  which  one 
jftandeth  whole  before,  and  of  the  other  I  fee  nothing  but  the  head, 
which  ftandeth  behinde  the  firft.  -  . 

I  fee  not  any  with  Crowns  now.  The  apparel  of  him  is  white 
that  I  fee. 

I  fee  no  hands  of  him.       I  fee  nothing  now. 

The  f  snares  and  pricks  appear  again  as  yefterday. 

And  I  doubted  it  was  fomethuig  of  the  Glafs  it  f«lf:  as  there  were  in  it  certain 
white  fpots. 

An  hour  we  were  at  the  praftife. 

A.  The  fecond  Exercife  before  Dinner.       After  the  Prayer  thrice  faid,  &C.  JL 

Arth.  I  fee  the  fii  ft  fquare  lines  and  pricks,  white  and  black  :  the 
pricks  for  the  moft  part  be  all  white,  but  fome  are  black,  and  the  lines 
all  white. 

I  faw,  even  now,  fome  of  thofe  fquares  made  Lions :  but  now  there 
appear  none. 

The  fquares  are  now  turned  alfo  into  other  fhapes,  which  I  cannot 
well  declare. 

Now  the  Letters  be  gone,  and  the  fquares  do  appear  again. 

The  fquares  are  'gone,  and  a  word  is  there. 

The  letters  are  clearer  then  they  were  :  for  all  the  lines  and  letters 
do  appear  white. 

There  appeareth  a  B,  with  a  fquare,  with  four  black  pricks  in  it. 

It  is  gone. 

Now  fome  of  the  fquares  are  come  amongft  the  letters  B  D  O. 
Under  the  B  appeareth  a  little  e  thus  a  backward. 

The 


6  A  true  ^Retatlon  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Actions^  with  Spirits,  d^c. 

The  letters  as  if  one  had  cut  them  in  the  glafs       B   D  O 

Here  appeareth  a  Caftle  with  little  pinacles  like  a  Church. 

Now  It  is  s;one. 

B  a  this  appeared  and  fuddenly  is  gone. 

Now  there  appeareth  a  young  man  with  a  white  doublet,  and  his 
arms  by  his  fide,  and  a  B  before  him  againft  his  doublet.  He  hath  a 
black  br'ard  and  a  white  face.  I  fee  no  hair  on  his  head  :  his  beard 
is  a  li'-tJe 

He  is  now  changed  :  he  hath  on  his  doublet  breaft,  on  each  fide 
three  black  lines. 

He  is  gone,  and  another  is  come  in  his  place,  with  a  white  leather 
doub'cr,  and  a  grey  cloke  like  Han'^  of  Glc^ats  his  cloke.  He  i^  gone. 

The  fii  ft  young  man  is  come  again,  and  hath  now  on  the  one  fide 
of  his  doublet  ~  on  the  other  fide,  thus   : 

Now  I  fee  only  two  ftrokes  overthwart  all  the  doublet^but  he  hath 
no  head  that  I  lee. 

Either  his  h°ad  is  come  again,  or  dCe  another  man,  that  hath  two 
lines  and  two  p  i:ks  a^  he  had. 

The  jis^ht  of  the  candle  did  feem  to  ihine  fuddenly  on  his  face,  and 
po  away  again.  It  did  nqt  fhine  on  his  doublet,  but  onely  on  his 
face  and  his  head. 

There  is  now  another  mnn  come  in,who  holdetb  up  both  his  hands: 
the  upper  part  of  his  fleeves  are  whice,and  the  half  towards  his  hands 
black. 

The  fi  fi:  man  i^  here  fiill.  Now  he  hath  no  arms.but  a  B  before  his 
doub'er.  but  no  lines,  but  only  on  each  fide  two  pricks  in  ftead  of  the 

lii.cs,  rhu    :   : 

Thefe  men  came  amongft  the  fquares  fuddenly  before  I  was  aware. 

Here  ;  ppear  not  fo  many  as  were  here. 

Here  ■  r?  now  but  fix  fquares,  and  one  man.  I  fee  no  farther  of 
the  man  but  to  rhe  wafte  of  his  doublet. 

The  man  appeareth  notfo  biim  to  my  fight  as  he  did,  his  head  is 
no  bigger  than  the  mark  in  the  margent. 

in.  The  third  Exercjfe  after  Dinner. 

Arth.  Whereas  I  fiid  before  there  was  fome  of  the  fquare  figures 
wanting  :  Now  I  finde  that  they  are  all  here  again,  as  many  as  they 
were  at  my  firfl:  feeing. 

In  lifting  up  the  Stone,  and  bringing  it  doyvn  again,  the  fquares  do . 
all  feem  like  B  B  of  the  Roman  letters. 

A.  Mi^na  mora.  • 

Arth.  I  (ee  now  B  A.  It  is  now  vanifhed  away,  after  three  Pater 
nofter  times  faying.  R  a  appeareth,  but  I  cannot  fee  clearly  the  foot 
of  the  R.     Now  it  is  gone 

Xo     I  fee  a  thing  all  white  in  this  form,  and  a  little  o  before  it.  It 

would 


A  true  "Relation  of  Dr.  Dec  his  AUions^  mth  Spirits,  ^c. 


5 


(halt  have  jufticeagaiiift  him.     See  therefore  that  thoiifmite;  fee,   I  fay  again,  that  thou  Juflre  *- 
fniite  him,  for  JulHce  is  the  hand  of  the  Higheft  punifhing  fiich  as  offend,  either  againft^^^y?  fonlt. 
him  or  his  Innocent.  /»/?  c'^. 

Thcfe  that  now  come  unto  thee,  have  brought  thee  a  great  Clufter  of  grapes,  even  as  'i  h;  lord 
big  as  they  can  both  carry  :  aniongft  the  which,  nocvvithfranding  there  are  many  rotten.  Czorck 
But  behold,  the  foolilhncfs  from  above  fhall  appear  uii'dom  before  them,  when  their  *^'^'^'^"'^''^''S' 
wifdom  (hall  become  foolifhiiefs  before  me,  and  before  themfelves.  ^  He  aliu- 

Round  about  thee  thou  Ihalt  receive  alliJbnce  ,  and  many  hearts  (hall  be  made  "lad  '^"^  ^"-  ^'^^ 
in  thee.  "       TT^Va 

As  for  my  Treafures  to  be  opened.   To  hmi  that  defileth  my  Seat,  and  the  Sword  of  fo°.  the  chil- 
Jmbce.  drenol  Ilrad 

To  him  that  harboureth  abomination  in  his  own  houfes,  and  Ii(tneth  unto  wicked  To  the  quc- 
cbunfel.  (tion  of 

Unto  him  which,  hath  defpifed  me,  which  is  accurfed  of  me,  (hall  none  of  my  Trea-  Branden- 
fures  be  opened.  b  rgh  fend- 

I  have  judged  him,  and  it  (hall  appear  (hortly.  i^g  to. 

That  which  is  C<pn  give  \ix\to  Cdcfar  j  and  chat  which  is  mine,  unto  the  Houfe  of  my  ^-(P-^^dft 

onour.  Anuutoi:- 

Be  obedient  (as  the  fervant  of  God)  unto  thy  Superiours :  and  whileft  thou  niaift,  di-  "^'^^'*"*  I"' 
ligentiy  do  Jultice.     Thy  Country  (hall  receive  fuch  remembrance  of  thee,  as  (hall  never  r*^'-  "^ 
be  rafed  from  the  face  of  the  earth:  until  the  fire  come  downfrem  heaven  consuming  all  things,  ^uhjsye^ali- 

Be  fuir  of,  hiunility,  and  abandon  pride.  ^,^'^  n^  ^  ,^," 

Bow  down  thine  ears  nnco  the  poor.  ^,  portia. 

Be  often  forry  forthy  dayesmii-fpenr. 


Hoi 


Be  (trong  for  ever  in  me. 


A- 


Vdufa. 


But  behold,  I  am  even  he, 


the  Lord  o(Ja»emy 

Wife. 


Ke!eo£gro;o 

Our  mutual 
participadiig 
one  with 
another. 


Thy  wife  is  even  at  the  door  of  ficknefs 
health. 

E.K. 

As  unto  thee,  Barrennefs  dwelleth  with  thee,  becaufe  thoudidft  negleft  mc,  and  take  Ed  K-  uxor 
a  wife  unto  thy  felf  *  contrary  unto  my  commandment :  for  neither  young  nor  old,rich  fierilisiUl 
nor  poor,  are  refpefted  wich  me  •,  but  what  I  will  have  done,  is  juft,  and  whofoever  doth  erat- 
it  not,  is  privily  (if  he  be  not  openly)  punilhed  for  his  offence.     Therefore  thou  (halt  t  At  y^/<jrr- 
ha ve  the  womb  which  thou  had  barren^  ana  fruitleji unto  thee,  becaufe  thou  haft  tranfgre(red  ^•^kfi^'S 85. 
that  which  I  commanded  thee. 

Be  it  unto  thy  brother,  as  his  fervice,  truft,  and  confidence  hath  been  in  me,  and  to-  DeThoma 
wards  me. 

Lay  your  hands  to  work,  and  your  bodies  unto  labour,  and  participate  c»e  with  an- 
cthtry  as  IS  commanded  yoa. 

That  the  blelTing  which  I  have  promifcd you  may  go  forward  in  you  i  and  that  your( 
labour  may  bring  forth  good  fruic. 

The  fourteenth  day  hence  (hall  this  Aftion  end  :  I«  which  day  you  JhaU  once  again  af-  jg  yipnlh 
femble  your  fcivei  here  together.     And  now  behold  I  fay  unto  thee,  unto  thee,  that  li^A  futuradie 
thy  eyes  opened,  and  thy  ears  made  perfeft,  which   ha]i  been  exalted  by  tb$  fight  of  the  Saturm. 
heavens,  why  doll  thou  call  upon  me,  dcliring  to  tf  wade  free.  £.ir.toldme 

Is  It  a  burthen  unto  thee  to  be  comforted  from  above  ?    O  fooli(hman  !    by  how  much  t^ar  he  had 
the  heavens  excel  the  earth,  by  fo  much  doth  the  gift  that  is  given  thee  from  above,  ex-  ^'1  ^)\°  Lent 
eel  all  earthly  trcafure.     Notwich(tanding,  becaufe  that  Manna  is  loathfom  unto  thee,  P'^**''  once  a 
behold  what  is  faid  unto  thee  this  day.  leaft^tV  t  he 

7hou  art  wade  free ;  neither  (halt  thou  any  time  hereafter  be  conjirained  to  fee  the  judgment  ^j_^j  * 
ef  the  higheli,  or  to  hear  the  voices  of  the  heavens.  ^ore  ^^^^ 

But  thou  art  a  ftunibling-block  unto  many.  dealing  to 

Notwithftanding,  my  Spirit  (hall  dwell  with  thee ;  and  in  the  works  of  thy  hands  thou  skfy. 
fiialt  receive  comfort. 

And  the  power  which  is  ^ivf«  thee  of  feeing,  (hall  be  dimini{hed  in  thee,  and  (hall  Arthur  I)<e 
dwell  upon  the  firil-begotten  Son  of  him  that  ftteth  by  thee,  a<  I  have  *  before  faid.  .•.  Prague 

In  the  mean  feafon  (hall  he  be  exercifed  here  before  me,  until  the  time  come,  that  his  <»««.i58j. 
eyei  (hall  be  opened,  and  his  ears  receive  fajfage  towards  the  higheli. 

And  thele  fourteen  dayes  lliall  it  be  a  time  unto  thee  of  chufing  or  refuling. 

For  [will  not  caft  thee  away,  neither  out  of  my  houfe,  unlefi  it  belong  of  thy  own  igno-  Un\ctR,&f» 
ranee,  and  wilf'd  d^ffifmg  of  my  great  benefit. 

If  thou  therefore  be  weary  of  it,  the  fourteenth  day  hence,  bring  hither,  and  lay  be- 
fore me  I  he  Powder  which  thou  haft,  for  thou  haft  offended  me.  Of- 1  falfc  Jieward,  in  takjng  j^e  PewdeT 
put  of  that  w'eich  it  not  thine  ^W/i. 

*  A  a  a  2  I  will 


^  A  true  'Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBtoru,  ivith  Spirits^  6cc. 

.i>.      ■  .■■    ■  I       ■  — —   ^.—        .1.  ,.—  ■-  -  I..  — .  -III..  ..I  ■— ..  ,  .111. ■.■iiiiin«» 

I  will  no  longer  dally  with  you,  but  will  give  unto  you  according  unto  your  works. 

A.  O  God  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  deal   not  with  us  according  to  the  wickednefs, 
frowarduefs,  and  blindnefs  of  our  hearts.      Amen. 


Oratio  fro 
ylrthftro 
cjU4  in  exer- 
citilsfti^suti 
debet  mjfl'f 
CIS' 


NOTE. 

A.  T  "fPon  this  former  part  of  the  Third  Aftion  General,  where  my  firft  begotten  Son 
\_J[  (namely  Anfrr)  was  alTigned  to  the  Miniftry  of  feeing  and  hearing,  in  place  and" 
ttead  of  E.K.  if  he  would  utterly  refvfe  the  ^ame  office  (hitherto  by  him  executed,  and  by 
him  to  be  executed,  uucil  the  fcven  aftions  general  finiftied)  And  that  the  fame  Childe 
and  Son,  in  the  mean  fpuce  (that  is  to  fay,  between  the  day  of  the  part  of  Aftion  recei- 
ved, and  the  end  of  the  fame:  determined  to  be  fourteen  day es  after)  fhould  be  exercifed 
before  GoJ.  I  thereupon  thinking  that  E.  JC.  woidd,  ftiould,  or  belt  could  inftruft  and 
dirfeft  the  Childe  in  that  exercife,  did  alwayes  await,  that  E.K.  would  of  himfelf  call  the 
Boy  CO  that  Exercife  with  him  ;  and  fomuch  the  rather,  becaufe  hefaid,  that  he  was  very 
ghd  now  that  he  p'mhlkave  a  Witnefs  of  the  thivgs  jhewed  and  dtclaredhy  ^iritual  Creatures: 
And  that  he  would  be  more  wdling  to  Jo  what  ihould  be  fo  enjoyned  to  him  to  do,  then 
if  oncly  he  himfelf  did  fee,  and  that  for  divers  caufes.  But  when  E.  K.  faid  to  pie,  that 
I  ihould  exercife  the  Childe  and  not  he,  and  that  he  would  not,  I  thereupon  appointed 
with  my  felf  to  bring  the  Childe  to  the  place,  and  to  offer  him,  andprefent  him  to  the 
fervice  of  Seeing  and  Skrying  from  God,  and  by  Gods  aifignment,  and  of  the  time  ©f 
fourteen  daycs  yet  remaining,  being  the  15, 16,  17  dayes  of  April,  and  next  before  the 
iS  day,  (the  day  alFigned  to  end  the  Aftion  in)  to  have  the  Childe  exercifed  in  them.  And 
thereupon  contrived  for  the  Childe  ciiis  order  of  Prayer  enfuiitg. 

T)ie  Mercuriifummo  mane  die  Apr ilis  15.  anno  1587.  T^rebona, 

In  the  Name  of  God  the  Father,  of  God  the  Son,  and  of  God  the  Holy 

Ghoft.      Amen. 
Glory  be  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  theHoly  Ghoft; 

As  it  was  in  the  beginning,  isnow,  andever  ftaJlbe,  world  without 

end.     Amen. 

O  Almighty  andEverlajiing,  the  true  and  living  Ged,  have  ntersy,  pity  and  compafion  m  my 
futkcr  John  Dee,  and  on  me  Arthur  Dee;  who  being  now  called  hither  by  thy  afftgnment, 
amnowkerefrefntandr^adym  all  humility,  obedience  and  faith fulnefi,  to  ferve  thy  Divine 
Miiieity,  with  aL  t^'e  gifts  and  graces  which  thou  baji  hitherto  endued  me  with ;  and  with  all'othef 
which  of  thy  rnofi  h^'imi'ifvl  and  fatherly  mercy,  thou  wilt  henceforward  hejlow  upon  me.  Lighten 
(therefore)  0  Al, nighty  God ^  mine  eyes,  and  open  thou  mine  ears ;  ^icken,  InfiruU  and  Con- 
firm in  yae,  and  unto  me,  my  difcretion^  judgement,  undtrjiand/ng,  memory,  and  utterance,  that 
I  rytay  he  a  true  and  fir  fee:  Seer,  Hearer,  heclanr  and  Wiinefi  of  fuch  things  which  either  im- 
mediately of  thy  T) IV im  Ma]e!iy,  or  mediately  by  the  ministry  of  thy  holy,  mighty,  and  faithful 
Angels  pall  be  manifelhd, 'declared  or  Jhewedunto  me,  now,  and  at  all  times  and  occaftons,  for 
the  advancing  of  thy  Fraife,  Honour  and  Glory.    Amen. 

Hereupon,  ^fiw/H/«j  morning,  (the  15  of  this  ^pri/)  I  brought  the  Childe  to  the 
holy  Table,  being  in  order  of  the  furniture  thereto  belonging,  and  fet  before  him  the 
Stone  in  the  frame,  (my  firft  fanftified  Stone)  and  caafed  him  on  his  knees,  to  fay  the 
forefaid  Prayer.  And  I  alfo  piaid  to  the  Childs  hearing,  other  Prayers  to  God  for  the 
purpofe  ill  hand  :  and  at  his  coming  to  look  and  fee  in  the  Stone, 

There  appeared  to  him  (as  he  judged)  divers  little  fquare  figures,  with  pricks,  and  di- 
■vtrs  other  figures  and  lines,  which  I  caufed  him  with  his  own  hand  to  imitate  upon  a  pa- 
per with  pen  and  ink. 

The  hues  were  white,  and  fome  of  the  pricks  alfo,  but  other  of  the  pricks  were  black, 
as  of  ink. 

Arth.  Two  old  men  with  black  beards,  and  with  golden  Crowns 

upon  their  heads,  do  appear.    One  is  now  gone  :  this  holdeth  hrs 

hands  before  him  like  a  Maid. 

Arth. 


A  trtte^R^ation  cf  Dr.  Dee  his  Actions^  Mtth  Spirits^  &c. 


would  Teem  to  bs  as  an  X  and  an  o.     In  is  vani/hed  away. 

e  B  An  EngliHi  licrlc  c,  and  a  Pvoman  great  B. 

It  is  gone  before  I  can  be  aware. 

SB  now  appcareth.  B  by  himfelf:  it  appcareth  followins;  S  B 
thus  SB     B. 

N  appcareth  by  the  laft  B,  in  order  following,  thus  SB     B  N. 

I  can  fee  no  more  now  but  the  S  B  the   B  and  N. 

f  B  appear.  c  B  is  here  now.  B  by  himfelf,  with  two  great 
white  pricks  before  it,  appear.      The  pricks  wax  dim. 

The  man  flandeth  amongil:  the  fquares  and  letters  in  the  midft  of 
them.        .]    This  now  appeareth.       The  4  little  pricks  be  gone. 

There  appeareth  like  a  B  and  a  d  joyning  to  it. 

A  circle  appeared  with  a  black  prick  in  it-and  two  white  pricks  af- 
ter. An  n,  two  ftrikes,  and  two  white  pricks  after.  The  n  is  white 
and  the  p:  ick  within  the  n  black.  ua  appeared,  and  quickly  went 
away.  Two  long  ftrikes  by  themfelves,  white.  The  two  pricks 
black,  and  the  crooked  line  white.  Four  white  pricks  by  themfelves. 
Two  black.  Two  long  white  ftrikes  and  a  prick.  A  round  circle 
whitc,and  a  black  p;  ick  in  it.  A  white  prick  by  it  (^£\L  A  little  prick 
as  it  were  blotted,  and  a  ftroke  by  it  all  white.  The  crooked  lines 
white,and  the  pricks  black.  Two  white  pricks  by  themfelves.  Two 
long  white  ftrokes.     lo  Thefe  both  white. 

Here  appeareth  the  thing  like  the  Caftlc,  all  white. 

The  pricks  black,  the  Imes  white.  A  little  Englifh  o  by  it  felf. 
Four  white  ftrokes.  The  man  is  here  in  the  midft  of  the  things,  as 
beiore  I  told.     Four  white  pricks. 

Note  :     All  the  (hews  are  within  the  uppermoft  quarter  of  the 
ftone,  as  where  A  with  the  prick. 

Like  a  figure  of  2  all  white.       Two  little  black  pricks,,  and  the 

ftroke  white.       They  are  now  gone.       D  o  appeareth  all  white. 

X  o  appeareth  all  white.      B  e  appeareth  white.      Two  o's  joyned 

like  a  figure  of  8  all  white.       A  great  Roman  white  S  by  it  felf. 

B  Bu  Thcfe  appear  white.     A  white  prick  by  it  felf.     An  Englifh 

little  t  white.     Two  lines  white. 

Mora  magna.  So  we  ended. 

A.  God  enrich  us  with  his  Truths. 

The  end  of  Jhurfdajs  third  Eicercife. 


o 


Friday  Morning. 
I. 

The  Prayers  on  both  parts  being  faid. 

Arth.  I  fee  not  the  fquares,  lines,  pricks,  and  thofc  other  thingi 
which  I  was  wont  to  fee  firft. 

Mora,  hors  vnim. 

Aftar 


-      -  .  -  ,._  ,         ■        .  -     '      -        .  ■ ' ^ 

8  A  true  Illation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBiom,  mth  Spirits  ^  (5cc. 

After  I  had  tarried  an  hour,  and  had  had  no  evident  fhew  :  as  I  asked  the  boy  dili- 
gently again,  he  faid  that  he  had  from  the  beginning  feen  thus       _      h     b 

Alio  there  appeared  X  o  all  white.      Do  the  o  joyneth  to  the  D. 

Fiat  voluntas  Dei  in  fiialuce  &  veritttte,  ad  e]uf  nominis  laudew,  bomrem;gloriar».  Amen. 


Friday.  T  I. 

Treces • 

Mora  hort  unius  Jpatio. 

Nulla  ojlenfto  toto  illo  tempore. 
/i.  Bemdiaio,  viifericordia  &  Pax,  Dei,  &  Domini  noftri  Jefu  Christ,  fit  fuper  ncs^  & 
nobifcum  :  nunc  &  in  fempiterna  fdCulorum  fxCula.     Amen. 


Friday  3.  a  meridie. 

Mora  Magna. 
Mult£  faB£  preces  erant,  &  invitati  illi  fideles  Dei  fervi  quia  tXiaru  auxilia  fua  polliceban- 
tur  mcejjttatiqttocumque  tempore.     Et fi  mora  magna  &  admiranda  ;   &  apparitio  nulU 
faCfa  eft  puero  ipfu 
Thurfday  a         A-  tandem  mirabili  forUina^  five  fato  divim  acceffft  ad  ms  Dominus  E.K-  &  qtu  feque- 

n.eriU.'e  ch-  batttur  notavi.  „       ,■       ,    r  .     t-  1  1      .    • 

r^  3.  A.  He  fare  down  by  tis :  and  Arthur  yet  ftanding  before  me  at  the  Table,  bemg  co- 

vered after  the  beft  manner,  but  onely  the  Stone  being  fet  thereon  j  He  asked  if  any  thing 
appeared:  We  anfwered  No,  albeit  I  have  called  oftentimes,  and  have  prayed  carneftly 
that  forae  of  our  former  accounted  friends  might  ftiew  themfelves  to  the  boy,  as  Madi^ 
mi,  II,  Is,  and  chiefly  Vriel,  bccaxife  as  he  WM  firji  -which  appeared  to  the  ]oyning  of  E.K. 
Vr'el.  and  me  together  :  fo  he  might  be  alfo  the  Direftor  in  the  tranflating  of  E.  K.  hit  office  to  Ar- 

thur. Then  faid  he,  I  marvel  if  you  had  no  apparition  here  :  for  Ifomewhat  thinking 
oi  Arthur  ^nd  his  proceeding  in  thefeat  of  skrying,came  here  into  thegallery,andlheard 
you  pray  :  and  opening  the  window,  I  looked  out,  and  I  faw  a  great  mmiber  going  in 
and  out  of  this  Chappel  at  the  little  hole  in  the  glafs  window.  I  faw  Madimi,  II,  and 
many  other  that  had  dealed  with  us  heretofore,but  fhewed  themfelves  in  very  filthy  order; 
and  Vriel  appeared,  and ']ujUfied  all  to  be  of  God,  and  good  :  And  therefore  I  wonder  if 
here  you  have  no  (hew  :  perhaps  there  is  fomewhat,  but  Arthur  feeth  it  not. 

A.  True  it  is  :  and  how  fliouldl  help  him  herein,  feeing  I  cannot  yet  fee  or  skry  > 

E.  K.  I  will  come  and  fee  if  there  be  any  thing. 

A.  I  pray  you  do.  [Note:  and  fo  E.  if.  looked  towards  the  ftone,  and  he  by  and 
by  faid.  Here  appeareth  fomewhat,  and  pointed  to  ^rt^;/r,  where  :  and  asked  him  if  he 
faw  any  thing,  and  he  faid  No.     Then  faid 

E.K.  I  lee  like  a  white  Marble  fquare  table  or  book  lying  on  a 
wooden  desk.. 

A.  I  pray  you  Sir  take  the  pains  to  look  and  difcern  what  is  here  fhewed. 

E.K.   I  fee  written  upon  that  book, 

Beata,  qu£  perpeccatitm  viihi,  domum  corruentem  &  hominibus  integram  reddit. 

E.K.  Now  a  leaf  of  that  book  is  turned  open,  and  there  is  writ- 
ten on  it,  but  I  cannot  rcade  it  yet.     Now  I  fee  it. 

Egofum  qui  dedi  6"  daturuf  fum  vobit  legem  :  ex  qua  mortalibm  perpetua  requies  & 
jelicitas  fit  ventura. 

E.K.  Now  another  leaf  is  turned  over,  and  appeareth  written, 

Eftote  ergo  tales,  quales  me  meofque  decet,  &  rati  coram  vie  ambulate. 

E.K.  Now  turneth  over  the  leaf  of  it  felf. 

Ne  populus  efuriens  &  fitiens,  negligentia  ^  obftinatia  veftra  vel  mat  vel  faltem. 

E.K.  Now  the  leaf  turneth. 

Fro  tempore,  alimento  careat. 

E.K.  Now  the  desk  and  book  or  table  is  gone. 

A.  Note  :  By  and  by  after,  while  E.K.  did  look  into  the  Itone,  he  faid, 

E.K.  1  fee  a  hand  appear,  a  very  great  one,  white,  with  the  fingers 
Ipred  abroad.  E-K. 


A  true  'delation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBions,  mth  Spirits,  &c.  p 

E.  K.  The  hand  is  gone,  but  there  remaineth  writing. 

Videbitis  &  aiidietif  hrevi  omnes.     Si  interim. 

E.  K.   It  is  as  if  it  were  upon  the  fide  of  a  white  Globe  afar  off.  Sight  and 
The  Globe  turneth  fo  fwiftly  that  I  cannot  well  read  it.  \"mifcd. 

Aniyni  ad  weliora  compoti. 

E.  K.  The  Globe  turneth  fo  fwiftly  that. I  cannot  read  it  till  it 
ftand  ftill. 

Sefe  wibi  &  nieit. 

E.  K.  Now  again  the  Globe  is  turned  moft  fwiftly. 

(^YiUorum  more)  fubjicient.  Si  vera  (per  nieipfum  loquor  &  jure)  alieni  &  vagabundi 
aim  vobifntet  ipfn  difimperitis  non  oculo  ,  fed  corpcri,  immo  omnibuf  membris ,  cafiu  & 
ruina  paratur.  §uales  enim  in  futuro  eritis^  vobit  ux  fcivetit  nuUo  modo  licet  :  Majors 
enim  a  fnperifntortalibus,  pr£  foribm  funt ,  quotidieque  infi ant  guamvel prima  ,  vel  fe- 
ciindo  etatit  modulo  fueruiit.  ^i  aures,  erigat  •.  Cui  inteUeBus^fapiat.  Omnta.  peccata 
apud  me  poftpont'.ntur  huic.  inf aniens  propter  meyfapiat ;  Immo  ndulteriza'm  propter  me^ 
in  fempiternum  benedicetur^&  premio  afficietur  celejii. 

E.  K.  Now  the  Globe  is  gone. 

A.  Gloria  Fatri  &  Filio  &  Sfiritui  fando  i  erat  in primipio  &  nunc  ^  & femper  &  in  fecula 

feculorum.     Amen. 
So  we  left  off. 


zA  Bionis  Tertia  altera  pars,  1587- 

*  Saturday 

,,,,_,       AprilisiS. 
Ttecei  ad  Deum  Omnipotentem  ,  profua.  veritatenthit  impartiema^  ad  mmmu  ]uo  UU' 

demjbonorem  &  gloriam. 

A.  Note  ^rtfewr  was  fet  to  the  ftone,  but  nothing  appeared  ;  E.K.  had  brought  the 
powder  with  him  as  he  was  bidden  to  do.  Then  I  defircd  him  to  apply  himfclf  to  fte  as 
he  was  wont.     And  fo  he  did. 

E.  K.  Here  appear  all  in  the  ftone  that  appeared  yefterday  unto 
me  in  the  air  in  that  moft  diforderly  and  filthy  manner.  They  are  in 
the  like  apparel  as  yefierday. 

A.  O  God  confirm  us  in  thy  truth  for  thine  own  honour  and  glory,  andfufferusnotto 
be  overcome  with  any  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  all  evil  now  and  ever. 

E.  K.  There  appeared  Madimi,  II.  and  the  reft  :  And  fo  they 
are  here  •,  but  now  all  the  reft  are  gone  ,  and  onely  Madimi  remain- 
eth. 

Madimi  openeth  all  her  apparel,and  her  felf  all  naked^  and  fiieweth 

her  fiiame  alfo. 

E.  K.     Fie  on  thee,  Devil  avoid  hence  with  this  filthinefs,&c. 

Mad.  Inthe  Name  of  God^why  finde  you  fault  vitb  mee  ? 

A.  Becaufeyouryefterdayes  doings,  and  words  are  provocations  to  fin,  and  unmeet  for 
any  godly  creature  to  ufc. 

Mad.  JVkat  is  fin  ? 

A.  To  break  the  Commandement  of  God. 

Mad.  Set  that  down,  fo. 

Mad.  If  the  felf-fame  God  give  you  a  new  Commandement  takjng  away  the  former  form 
cf  fin  which  he  limited  by  the  Law;  What  remaineth  then? 

A.  If  by  the  felf-fame  God  thdt  gzsctht'L^vi  to  Mofes  ^  and  gave  his  New  Covenant  by 
Chrift,  who  fealed  it  by  his  bloody  and  had  his  witnefTes  very  many,  and  his  Apoftles  in- 
ftruaed  by  his  hcly  Spirit ,  who  admoniftied  us  of  all  cleanncfs  in  words  and  works,  yea 
and  in  thoughts,  if  by  the  fame  God,  hofe  former  Laws  and  DoQrinti  be  abrogated^znd  that 

*   B  b  b  fufficient, 


lo  A  true  'Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  Im  AUtons,  mth  Spirits^  6c c. 


Jiirtic;eiii:       {"lifficiciu  proof  and  tejitMcny  may  be  had  that  it  u  the  fame  God   :  Then  nniit  the  fame  God 
piontand       be  obeyed  :   For  only  God  is  the  Lord  of  Lords,  King  of  Kmgs,  and  Governour  of  all 


tefiimony 
to  be  had 
hctein. 


E  K     She  knccleth  ,  and  holdeth  up  her  hands. 

Mad.  Ihe  Laws  <  God,  and  of  h'uSon  Chriji,  \Ulliil.-ed  by  the  tejiimony  of  his  Vifciples  and 
A.Aptivi-  Ci.ngrtgax'ion  ,  and^y  the  force  and  fewer  of  hit  holy  Sfirit ,  are  not  in  any  particular  voca- 
ledgc  grant-  uon  abrogated,  but  rather  confirmed. 

cdilothnoc  p^y  oftintimes  it  falleth  out  ,  that  God  being  offended  at  the  wick^ednefs  of  any  man,  or  of  fonts 
abrogate  a  ^^^^  frivate,  fendeth  down  his  Sprit  of  Death,  infeUing  and  temping  another  mans  minde  ■■,  fo 
Law,tuc  ^^^j.  ^^  licomith  void  of  Keafon,  and  rifeth  up  againji  him,  w'.'om  God  is  offended  with,  and  jiri- 
dotn  n*^"^'  .^  ^^(^  jy^yy,^  j-Q  ^}j(H  f,g  dyeth.  This,  before  man,  is  accounted  fn .  before  Cod  tt  (hall  be  imputed  unto 
the  lawiii  i:  hiyn  for  righteoufnefs,  Evenfo  whatfoever  the  Spirit  of  God  teacheth  us  from  him  ,  though  it  ap~ 
lelf  other-     par  fin  before  man,  is  righteoufnefs  before  hm. 

^,fe/  'j'heref ore  affure your  felves  ,  that  whatfoever  is.  Ccen  and  heard  amongft  you,  is  from  above, 

»  Arthur  and  is  a  fgn  and  tejiim.ny  evenihisday  before  you;  for  Irhat  touched  thySon,^  might  alfo  have 
v?as!m:ten    taJ^'n  (<yfay  his  breath. 

in  a  1  wound       _j;„f  o,yoiuare  of  little  underjianding  :  But  behold  I  teach  you. 

and  EK.  jIj^j  ^„^to  thofe  that  are  acccounted  righteous  (through  the  good  will  of  God)  fin  is 

lawonein     :^,j^jy.  punifhsd,  but  not  as  unto  the  wicked.    For  whatfoever  you  have  done  unto  other 
a  loriR  white  jj^g^^^gyenthe  felf-fame  (hall  light  upon  you ,  but  happy  is  he  that  receiveth  notjujitce  through 
^^T^"s         *^'^  terror  of  malediCiion,  but  through  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God. 
thouehhe  The  Apojile 'Pnu\  abounded  in  carnal  lu^  :  he  wm  alfo  offenfive  unto  hit  brethren  fo  that  he 

wouW  imice  defpaired,  and  was  ready  to  have  left  his  vocation,untill  the  Lord  did  fay  imto  him  ,  My 
him.  He  was  vtercy  and  grace  fufficeth  thee. 
very  fick  tor       Beleeve  me,  that  we  are  from  above. 

the  time.  JFhich conftdered  :  C.nfider  alfo,  7 hat  Of yiu  cannot  comprehend  the  heavens,  fo  Ukewife  can 

jud.ce.         ygJ^  ^^t  compre'iend  the  wifdome  of  God,  which  faith,  I  will  be  merciful  unto  whom  I  lift;  and 
S.fau/  k-    ^nto  whom  Iwillnot,!  have  noneinftore  :  Foolifh  is  he  tha.- askeih  why  ? 
r  ^"^H  A   -         -^"^  behold  I  fay  mto  yuu,Stum[[e  not  againft  God.  Who  he  is  that  mad-  y  u?Who  is  he  that 
I  hath  given  you  power  to  look-up  towards  heavejt  ?  lou  are  foAs  ^  and  of  little  underjianding: 

The'wifdom  This  day  faith  Gi^d  unt  you, 

of  Gcd  ot  us  B'holdyou  are  become  free  :  Do  that  which  ntojl  pleafeth you  ;  Tor  behold,  your  own  reafon 
n  comprc-      rifeth  up  againft  my  wifdome. 

hcnfible.  '^ot  content  you  are  tobeheires,'  but  you  would  be  Lords,  yea  Gcds,  yea  the  J' dg,ers  of  the 

heavens :  Wherefore  do  even  my  u  liji,  hut  if  you  forakj  the  way  taught  you  frm  ab  ve,  behold 
evil  Ihall  enter  into  your  fenfes,and  abom'mic'ion  fhal  dwel  before  your  eyes,as  a  recompence, 
unto  fich  as  you  have  done  wrong  unto :  And  your  wives  and  cbildren,jhall  be  carried  away  before 
your  face, 

A.  The  Almighty  God  of  heaven  and  earth  be  my  comfort ,  as  Idefire  comfort  in  his 
fervicei  and  give  me  wifdome  as  I  defire  it  for  his  honour  and  glory.  Amen. 

_   ^,  E.K.I  fee  a  white  pillar;  and  upon  the  pillar,!  fee  four  heads. 

TheChty-  •     i      i  11  J    u  •  u      1/1 

fialirtc  pillar       Shee  tieth  the  pillar  round  about  with  a  lilt. 

The  four  heads  are  like  on  tv/o  heads,  and  on  two  Wolves  heads. 

Now  there  Cometh  a  thing  like  a  white  Crown  of  Chriftal,  and 
flandeth  upon  all  our  four  heads.  The  heads  feem  to  be  inclofed  by 
the  necks  within  the  pillar. 

Now  flic  taketh  the  pillar  and  goeth  up  with  it. 

Now  fhe  bringeth  an  half  Moon  down  ,  and  written  in  it  as  fol- 
loweth. 

Injujlum  nihil  quod  ]ujium  eft  Dec. 

Now  flie  goeth  round  about  upon  a  thing  like  a  Carpet ;  fhe  gocth 
now  beyond  where  is  an  Orchard;  flie  cutteth  branches  of  two  trees, 
and  fliee  fecmeth  to  infert  them,or  grafFthem  into  another. 

Now  fhe  goeth  into  a  black  place  behinde  the  wood,  and  bringeth 
a  thing  with  her  in  a  chain  :  An  ugly  thing  like  a  Devil. 

Mad Behold,  feeft  thou  this  :  wherewithal!  thou  thoughteft  to  overthrew,  and  ntoft  infeS, 

thou  art  utterly  overthrown,  and  (halt  never  return  again. 

E.K.  Now  he  leapeth,  and  the  ground  openeth,  and  he  Enketh  in : 

and 


A  true  delation  of  Dr.  Dee  hu  Atlions,  mth  Spirits,  ^d  ti 


and  there  lecmeth  a  Ttink  of  brimftone  to  come  to  my  Nofe  from 
the  pit. 

Now  the  grafts  are  all  grown  in  the  tree,  as  If  they  were  all  of 
one  tree. 

Now  (he  comctli  out  of  that  orchard.  Now  flic  gocth  round  about 
the  orchard,  and  leavcth  a  darknefs  like  a  cloud  round  about  the  or- 
chard. 

Mad VifMe  xo  God,  hut  invifible  to  wan. 

E.K.  Now  flie  cometh  again  upon  her  Carpet. 

Beh'Jdyif  you  rcjif?  not  God,  but  flnit  out  Satan  (jhrovgh  unity  afnongffyou)  thus  it  it  faid  Unky. 
unto  you,  Affewhk  your  felves  together  every  feventh  day,  that  your  eyes  77: ay  be  opened,  and  An  offer  of 
that  you  may  inid(rjiand  by  hiw  that  fl.'all  teach  you,  what  the  fecrcts  of  the  holy  books  (deli-  V"^^^  7^^ 
vered  you)  are  :  That  you  may  become  full  of  undeiftaudiiig,   aud  in  knowledge  above      "^  l°  if 
common  men.  taught  the 

And  in  your  works  go  forward,  and  detraft^no  timCj  that  you  may  alfo  have  fruit,     books^recei- 

Unto  Jrii;i<z»«  I  will  be  merciful  forever,  according  to  my  promife.     But  I  will  buy  vcd. 
him  no  Kingdom,  after  the  manner  of  man,  with  money.     But  what  I  have  determined  The'  holy 
unto  him,  ihall  happen  inito  him  :  And  he  lliall  become  mighty  in  me.  •  booksddi- 

^  Arid  this  Powderwhich  thou  haft  brought  here,  is  appoinredfor  a  time  by  God,  vercd. 
and  cannot  be  ufed  until  then,   without  offence.    Happy  is  he  that  heareth  my  words  Our  works 
this  day  :  and  happy  is  he  that  underftandeth  them.  -  togoon. 

But  if  you  deny  the  Wifdome  of  the  Highcft,  and  account  us  his  MefrengerSjCrea-"l   ^'^^  ^^'''^ 
tures  of  darknefs.     Jhis  day  you  are  made  free.  '  j    ^ojeriberg. 

And  look^  that  y  ,u  lay  uf  all  things  that  u  ^oken  of  from  above  j  and  whatfoever  hath^   The  powder 
been  taught  you, (at  nfell  the  bookj  *t  inliruments.J  >  rr 

Toujhall  Jhortly  have  to  do  again  with  tbe  cruelty  of  the  Emperour,  and  the  accurfed)  Qmniarepv^ 
Bi(hop.  ^lendo. 

Whereunto,  if  you  go  forward  with  God,  you  JhaU  be  taught  to  anfwtr.     If  you  leave  ojf,  Caefar  & 
gf  foon  M  yiu  hear  of  it  be  going  into  Germany,  lejlyou  ferijh  before  then.  fapa  ^revi 

I  have  no  more  to  fay  untt  you,  but  my  fwiftnefi  is  from  above.  nos  inf'fl*' 

E.K.  Now  flic  maketh  her  (d^  ready,  &c.  {^«^  '^'""" 

Mad If  my  friendjhip  liks  you  not,  I  befeech  God  fend  you  as  good  will,  M  I  Qn  f  offer') 

iear  towards  you. 

I  have  not  one  word  mere  given  me  to  j^ea}{. 

E.K.   Now  flie  is  gone. 

A.  I  was  glad  that  an  offer  was  made  of  being  every  feventh  day  to  be  taught  the  fe-  * 
crets  of  the  books  already  delivered  unto  us  :  Thinking  that  it  was  eafie  for  us  to  per- 
form that  unity  which  was  required  to  be  araongft  us  four  ;  underftanding  all  after  th£ 
Chri.iian  and  godly  fenfe.  But  E.K.  who  had  yefterday  feen  and  heard  another  meaning 
of  this  unity  required,  utterly  abhorred  to  have  any  dealing  with  them  farther,  and  did 
intend  to  accept  at  their  hands  the  liberty  of  leaving  off"  to  deal  with  them  any  more  : 
which  his  undcirtanding,as  it  was  ftrange  and  unpleafant  unto  me,fo  I  earncftly  requefte4 
to  be  relblved  therein  in  manner  as  followeth. 

At  the  fame  time  and  in  the  fame  place  this  enfued. 

NOTE. 

A.  Upon  Mr.  Kelly  his  great  doubt  bred  unto  me  of  Madinii  her  words  yefterday,  fpo- 
kcn  to  hmi,  that  we  two  had  our  two  wives  in  fnch  fort,  as  we  might  ufe  them  in  common^  it  was 
agreed  by  us,  to  move  the  queftion,  whether  the  fenfe  were  of  Carnal  ufe  (contrary  to  the 
law  of  the  Commandment)  or  of  Spiritual  love,  and  charitable  care  and  unity  of 
niindes,  for  advancing  the  lervice  of  God. 

E.K.  Upon  a  Scroll,  like  the  edge  of  a  Carpet,  is  written, 
»  'De    utroq-^   loquor, 

A.  The  one  is  exprefly  againftthe  Commandement  of  God  :  neither  can  I  by  any 
means  confent  to  like  of  that  Doftrnic.  And  for  my  help  in  that  verity,  I  do  call  down 
the  power  of  Almighty  God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  the  good  Angels, 
(Tiis  faithfiil  Miniftcrs)  to  alfift  me  in  the  defence  of  my  faithful  obedienc*  to  the  law  of 
theCofpel,  and  of  his  Church. 

Agiji  me,  0  Cbriii.  Jffiii  me,  0  Jefu.  Jjjiji  me,  0  holy  Spirit. 

*    Bbb    2  E.Kv 


12  A  true  ^Relah on  of  D r.  Dee  his  JHions,  mth  Spirits y  6: c. 

E.  K.   it  appeareth  written  upon  a  white  Crucifix  ,  as  followcth, 

M^^  gratia,  major  eil  mandate.  Gratia  emrn  hec  meaeii.  Jit. komi  nil  lis  infa7iis  c^ncedere- 
tur  beatitudo  :  Et  que  ita  diCia  funt,  Vel  fmt^velkodie  libert.is  I'obk  re\Utintur.  Amen 
dico  vobifj  quia  fi  dicereyn  homint;  Eos,  &fatrem  Jifgula,  &nonfaCeret^  filius  ej\  f;c~ 
cati  &  murtis.  Omni;".,  eiiini,  polIlL  ilia  8i  Hcita  func  fuperis.  Neque  magk  cdioftt 
funt  pudenda  iUk^  quam  mortalium  quorumcumque  vultiis. 
Ita  enim  fiet.ffurim  cumfilioQquod  magk  abfurdum  ejiyopdabitur.  Et  oriens  cum  occidente^ 
Meridies  qiteque  cum  fepentrions  coadunahuntur. 

E.  K.  Now  it  is  vaniflied, 

A.  Hereupon  we  were  in  great  amazement  and  grief  of  mirnJe  ,  that  fo  hardjand  (as 
it,  }  et  fcenied  unto  me)  fo  impure  a  Doftrine,  was  popounded  and  enjoined  unto  us  of 
tliemjwhoml  alvvayes  (from  the  beginning  hitherto)  did  JK^ge  and  ejleei7t,  undoubtedly ^  to 
be  good  Angels  :  And  had  unto  E  K.  offered  my  foiiliK  a  fawn,  to  difcharge  E.K.  his  credit- 
ing of  them  ,  as  the  good  and  faithful  Minifters  of  Almighty  God.  But  now,  my  heart 
■was  fore  afRifted  upon  many  caufes  :  And  E.K.  had  (as  he  thought)  now,  a  juft  andfuf- 
ficient  caufe,  to  forfake  dealing  with  them  any  more.  As  his  prayer  to  God  of  a  long 
time  hath  been(asinthe  former  part  of  this  Aftion  may  appear.) 

After  our  going  out  of  the  Chappeljand  at  our  being  at  dinner,  when  we  four  (whofe 
heads  fo  were  united ,  in  a  pillar  mewed,  as  is  before  {ec  down  ,  I  found  means  to  make 
feme  little  declaration  of  our  great  grief  fmine  chiefly)  now  occafioned,  eitherto  try  us, 
or  really  tobeexecuteif,  inthecomi^aon  and  indifferent  ufing  of  Matrimonial  Afts  a- 
■?  niongft  any  couple  of  us  four  :  Which  thing  was  ftrange  to  the  women  :  And  they  hoped 

of  fdme  more  comfortable  iffue  of  the  caufe.  .And  fo  we  left  off. 

After  Dinner,  asE.  if.  was  alone,  there  appeared  unto  him  little  creatures  of  a  cubit 

high  :  and  they  came  to  the  Still  where  he    had  the  fpirit  of  VV  ine  diftilling  over  out  of 

a  Retorto  :  Andoneof  them  (whofe  name  they  exprcfled  Bf«)  faid  that  it  was  in  vain  fo 

to  hope  for  the  beft  fpirit  of  the  Wine  :    And  ihewed  him  how  to  diftill  it  ,  and  feparate 

it  better.  And  moreover  how  to  get  oyl  of  the  fpirit  of  Wine,  as  it  burned  in  the  lamps: 

And  began  to  ask  E.K.  what  Country-man  he  was?   And  when  he  had  anfwered  an 

Englijh-man,  he  asked  then,  how  he  came  hither  ?  he  anfwered  by  Sea:    Then  faid  he. 

And  who  helped  you  to  pafsthe  marvellous  great  dangersof  the  Sea.Andfo  took  occalion 

to  fpeak  of  the  benefits  which  God  had  hitherto  done  for  us,very  many  .And  this  Ben./aid 

than  among  very  nwny  other  thing?(as  Mr.  E.X.told  me  on  Saturday  night  after  Supper 

5c»wastbe  holding  on  his  talk  almoft  till  two  of  the  clock  after  midnight)  7hat  he  it  wot  that  deliver- 

dtliveier  of    ed  iiim,er  gave  unto  hk  hands  the  pwder.     And  alfo  he  faid  either  than  or  the  next  day  at 

the  powder     the  furthelt,that  tinleafi  he  would  be  conformable  to  the  will  of  God  in  this  laft  Aftion 

to  £.A'.at     declared  ,  that  he  would  take  thevertue  and  force  of  the  fowder  from  it  :  That  it  Ihouldbe 

the  digging    unprofitable:  Andthathejhotdd  become  a  beggar. 

in  England,       ^j^^j  ^^  me  alfo  he  faid  that  I  did  evil  to  require  froof ,  or  teftimony  now  ,  that  this  laft 
le°ft  co"d;     J^o^rine  was  from  God  Almighty,and  faid  that  I  ihould  be  led  prifoner  to  Ronie,Scc. 
tionally".  ''        ^^  to\do( England,  and  faid.  That  about  July  or  November  her  Majefty  fticuld  from 
QK£/.'       heaven  be  deftroyed  ;   and  that  about  the  (iime  time  the  King  of  5^ciM  ihould  dye.    And 
K.fhi.  ^hat  this  prefent  Pope  at  his  Mafs  Ihould  be  deprived  of  life  before  two  years  to  an  end. 

And  that  another  (houldbe  Pope,  who  fhould  be  Decimus  quintiu  of  his 

name  ;  And  that  he  would  begin  to  reform  things,  but  that  fhortly  he  (liould  of  the  Car- 
dinals be  ftoned  to  death.     And  that  after  that   there  fhould  be  no  Pope  for  fonie 
years. 
Englf.ud'  Of  England  he  faid.  That  after  the  death  of  our  dear  Queen,  One  of  t^e  houfe  0/ Auftria 

viade  mighty  by  the  King  of  Sfain  kk  death^  Jhould  invade  and  conquer  the  land,  &cc.  He  faid. 
One  (now  abroad)  (hould  at  MUford-haven  enter  ,  and  by  the  help  of  the  Britan^  fubdue 
the  faid  Conqueror  :  And  that  one  Morgan  a  Britaii  Jhculd  be  made  King  of  the  Britans, 
and  next  him,  one  KowlaHd,Scc. 

He  faid  alfo.  That  this  fr<?wc;f  Garland  was  an  efpy  upon  us  from  the  Lord  "Treafurer  of 
Tr.  Garland  ]^^^ia,jd  ■  And  that  Edward  Garland  is  not  his  brother :  And  that  fo  the  matter  is  agreed 
.1  between  them,0"c. 

That  my  Lord  Kofenberg  fhould  be  in  danger  of  poyfoning  for  thefe  certain  months 
to  come. 
Enochs  That  my  Tables  of  Enoch,  were  in  fome  places  falfly  written. 

Tables.  Of  Antichriit  he  fpake,  and  of  his  appearing. 

Antichrift.  Of  £/y  and  E??or/.' coming  out  of  Paradife  :  And  o(  Sz'int  John  EvartgeHft,thtit  he  dyeU 
Ely,  Enoch,  not,  hut  mPathmos  had  hk  invifible being  :  And  that  he  it  was,  who  did  gisc  J ulianne 
Johannes       Apoftata  his  deaths  wound. 

Evangelijta      Yit  laid  alfo  that  he  hath  at  divers  times  preached  vifibly  frncc  the  time  tf  hi  invifibU 
li ate  entrcd. 

-  He 


A  true^B^ation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  mth  Spirits,  dec,  13 

^  He   confirmed  the  words  of  the  great  Famine  and   Blood-flied  that  fhould   come  ■ 
fliortly. 

He  iaid  that  on  every  (ide  of  uSj  people  fhould  be  flain,  but  that  we  fhould  fby  the  Di-  God  our 
vine  proreftion)  efcape.  Protcaor. 

He  faid  that  Ihortly  this  Francis  Garland  fhould  go  into  England  :  And  that  we  fhould  t-  ^^^''^^^'^ 

he  foit  for.  But  that  it  were  beji  torefufe  their  calling  m  home.  IT'^'].  f"^{' 

He  faid  that  there  were  four  other  ,  who  were  made  alfo  privy  of  GoJ  his  myfteries  as  ^^'"  ^  ^^'" 
•II  n,     \  i         ^       -n  r      J  J  jing  home. 

we  were,  with  w  horn  we  mould  meet  at  Rome.  ^,-^ 

He  faid  that  Mary  and  one  more  in  Ens,land.  lliould  fee  the  wonderful  days  to  come.      ,:.„,  L^J.^ 

...  il-llr-  '    P^^   IJOrtt/» 

Mitdimi  appeared  to  uim  there  alio.  mvflcrio- 

The  fanie  Ben  went  once  away  mounting  up  in  a  flame  of  fire  :  and  afterward  upon  j-f^rn. 
occalion  of  asking  him  fome\vhatj  he  came  down  fo  again.  Mt^ry  my 

And  of  the  manner  how  to  draw  the  oyl  of  the  Spirit  of  wine  being  burnt,  he  brought  old  Maid, 
thither  the  initiuments  of  two  filver  difhes,  whelmed  one  upon  another  with  an  hole  paf-  Ben. 
ling  through  the  middle  of  them  both,  and  with  fponge  between  them  :  in  which  the 
oyl  would  remain,  &c. 

After  ail  thefe,  and  many  other  things  told  me  by  thefame  Mr.E.fC.  we  departed  each  About   2  of 
to  his  bed,  where  I  found  my  wife  awake,  attending  to  hear  fome  new  matter  of  me  from  the  clock  at- 
Mr.  Kelly  his  reports  of  the  apparitions,  continued  with  him  above  four  hours,  being  elfe  f'^f   mid- 
alone,  I  then  told  her,  and  faidj  J<?;«e,  I  fee  that  there  is  no  other  remedy,  but  as  hath  '}'.  ^^U 
been  faid  of  oiw cro (i-}7iatching,  foit  mufl needs  be  done.  ^"'     ^  ' 

Thereupon  fhe  fell  a  weeping  and  trembling  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour :  And  I  pa- 
cified her  as  well  as  I  could  ;  and  fo,  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  believing  of  his  Admo- 
nilhment,  did  perfwade  her  that  fhe  lliewed  her  felf  prettily  refolved  to  be  content  for 
God  hk  fake  and  bii  fecret  Purpofes^to  obey  the  Admonifhment. 

£i.  Note,  Becaufe  I  have  found  fo  much  halting  and  untruth  in  E.  K.  his  reports  to  ^p^//  20. 
niemade,  of  the  fpiritual  Creatures,  where  I  have  not  been  prefent  at  an  Aftion  :  and 
becaufe  his  memory  may  fail  him,  and  becaufe  he  was  fubjeft  to  ill  tempters,  I  believe 
fo  much  hereof  as  fhall  by  better  trial  be  found  true,or  conformable  to  truth. 

A.  Note  E.K.  had  this  day  divers  apparitions  unto  him  in  his  own  Chamber, 

ancUjiflruftions  in  divers  matters  which  he  regarded  not^  but   remained  flill  in  his  purpofc 

«/  utterly  difcrediting  thofe  Creatures,  and  not  to  have  any  more  to  do  with  thein.     But  1 

among  divers  apparitions  he  noted  this  of  one  that  faid  unto  him. 

......  Joya  Enoch  hit  Tables.  '  : 

Give  every  place  hit  running  number . 

E.K.  What  mean  you  by  places  ? 

Ihe  fquares.  Which .  done  ,  refer    every  letter  in  thf  "I able  to  hk  number  , ,  and 

ft  read  what  I  will,  for  this  U  the  laft  time  I  will  admonifliyov.    "'' 

E.K.  Amanitandcth  m  the  Aii;ma  fiery  Globe  of  my  hcighth, 
accompanied  with  fome  hundred  of  Puppets :  on  the  one  fide  of 
him  ftandeth  a  woman,  and  about  her  are  four  Clouds  all  white. 


The 


14-  Atrue'B^lationof  Dr.  Dee/;«  ABtons,  mth Spirits,  &c. 


The  man  upon  a  white  Triangle  a  /hewed  thele  Numbers  with 
fpaces,  as  you  lee  following. 


228 
409 


174 

272—— 

1 

225 

356 

131 

a5i — 
403 — 


A.  I  perceive 
that  com- 
nionly  one 

is  to  be  aba- 
ted of  the 
number. 


4P 
218 

410 

603 
149 

173 

175 

U7 

^73 
41(5 

226 
441 

2<5I 

586 

83 
132  - 

253 

V7 

39 
304 

[401 

4P5 
592 

35^ 
(5i8 

20 

501 

5P7 


4^^^ 

$P7 
502 

119 

264 
312 
24 
338 
411 

*  < 

603 
604 
150 
414 

3P^ 
467 

53 
59 

68 


418 

444 
355 

4P7 
20 

116 

287 

604 
610 
480 
182 
p8 
401 


4P5 

30(5 

473 

517 

363 

H7 
271 

3^7 
89 

II 

46 

267 
228 
331 

_£7 

2(5^ 

244 
400 

^3 

75 

17^ 
586 

545 
iS 

Jl?  ' 
25 
17 

P3 

52 

5" 

'75 
170 


46 
607 

17P 
141 

22 

403 

370 

97 

243 

80 
552 

295 

163 
418 

i!i 

222 
150 
253 

3P5 
538  - 

4^ 

55 

7 

123 

433 
'51 

285 

335 

621 

544 

352 
295 


3P5 

254 

42^3 

214 

261 

5P 
4P4 


517 
116 


103 


405 

HZ 

25 
606 


152 

418 

82 

320 

491 
390 
414 
366 

239 
182 

4<5o 

"^ 

175 

'7' 

73 


490 

418 

620 

214 

53 
32 

.t 

196 

224 

96 
188 

«5I2 

331 

20 

136 

358 

290 

335 

244 

408 

•7^ 

452 

-340 

424 

'P5 

97 

3H 

495' 

284 

> 


A.  Note : 


A  true  "B^ation  of  Dr.  Dec  his  J&ions^  nith  Spirits,  Sea  ly 


A.  Note  :  When  E.K.  had  fliewed  me  this  Note,  I  by  and  by  brought  fortli  my  book 
of  E«of?' his  Tables,  and  found  the  four  letters  r  t  b  d  to  be  the  four  firft  letters  of  the 
four  p  rincipal  fquares  landing  about  the  black  Crofs  :  and  that  here  chey  were  to  be  pla- 
ced ocherwife  than  as  I  had  fet  them.  And  in  the  firft  placing  of  them  together,  I  re- 
member that  I  had  doubt  how  to  joyn  them  j  for  they  were  given  apart  each  by  'them- 
felves. 

Secondly,  I  found  out  the  4  Charafters ;  Hiving  they  were  inverfei  fomewh.it,  and 
one  of  them  clofed  :  wherof  I  found  none  like,but  very  near.  Thefe  Churafters  were  of 
every  fqua re  one. 

Thirdly,  I  did  take  thefe  numbers  contained  between  the  lines  (fome  more  and  fome 
fewer)  to  be  words  to  be  gathered  out  of  the  Table  of  letters  :  fo  many  words  as  were 
diftinft  companies  of  numbers  ;  it  is  to  wit,  41. 

Hereupon  we  began  to  number  the  fquares  wherein  the  letters  flood  in  Enochs  Tables 
as  I  had  them,  but  we  could  noi  exaftly  finde  the  words,  but  fomewhat  near.  Hereupon 
being  tired,  anddefiroiis  to  know  the  fenfe  of  that  Cypher,  we  left  off  till  after  fupper, 
and  then  we  affayed  again  :  but  we  could  not  bolt  it  out,  though  we  knew  very  near 
■what  was  to  be  done  by  the  inftruftion  of  a  jpiritual  Voice,  now  and  then  helpin"  us  to- 
ward the  praftife. 

At  length  E.K.  fpai  willed  to  go  down  into  his  Chamber,  and  I  did  remain  ftill  at  our 
Dineing  Table  till  his  return,which  was  within  an  hour  or  fomewhac  more.  And  at  his 
return  this  he  brought  in  writing. 


r  z   I    1  a  f 

a  y  t  1  p 

a 

t 

a  oa  d V 

p  t  d  n  I  m 

24 

a  r  d  z  a    i 

dl 

3  a  1  a  m 

a 

a  bco  0 

r  0  m  e  b  b 

48 

c  0  0  n  s  a 

r 

c  y  a  V 

b 

t 

0  gc  on 

xm  a    1  g  m 

72 

t  0  I   t  t  z 

0 

p  a  c  0 

c 

n 

h  odd  I 

ale    a  0   0 

96 

s    1  g  a  s  0 

m 

r  b  z  n 

b 

P 

a  t  ax  I 

0  V  s.  p    s  n 

120 

f  m  0  n  d  a 

t  d  I  a  r 

I 

s 

a  a  1  xa 

a   r  V   r   0   I 

S 

144 

0  r  0  I  b  a 

h  a  0  z  p 

I 

m 

p  h  a  r  s 

I  g  a    I    0  1 

16S 

t    n  a  b  r  V 

1  X  g  a  s 

d 

m  a  m  g  I  o 

I  n  I    I    r  X 

►0 

192 

0   1  I  I  tT 

P  a 

I  0  a 

I 

0 

1  a  a  d  n 

g  a  t  a    pa 

5' 

216 

a  b  am  00 

0  a 

C    V    c 

a 

P 

a  I  c  0  I 

d  X  p  a   c  n 

24O 

ai  a  0  c  0  t 

T  n 

p  r  n 

t 

n 

da  z  n  z 

1  V  a  a   s    a 

264 

0  c  a  n  ma 

g  0 

t   r  r 

I 

I 

I  dp  0  n 

s  d  a  s   pi 

3 

28S 

s  h  I  a  I  r 

a  p 

m  z  0 

X 

X 

r  I  n  h  t 

a  r  n  d   i  J 

b  0  a  z  a  r 

0  p 

h  a  r 

a 

d 

0  np  a  t 

d  a  n  0    a   a 

B 
0 

n 

536 

V  n  n  a  xo 

p  s 

0  n  d 

n 

0 

1  0  ag  e 

0  0  b  a    V  a 

2 

En 

360 

a  I  g  r  u  n 

0  0  m  a  g  g 

0 

p  a  m  n  0 

V  g  m  d  n  m 

n 

384 

0  r  p  m  n  1 

ng 

b  e   a 

I 

a 

piste 

d  e  c  a   0   p 

9r 
0 

40S 

r  s  0  n  I  z 

I   r 

I  e  m 

V 

s 

cm  I  00 

n  a  m  1   o  x 

§. 

3 

432 

I  z  I  n  re 

Z    I 

a  m  h 

I 

V 

a  V  s  g  d 

1  V  r    lap 

• 

456 

mo  r  d  I  a 

1  h 

c   t    g 

a 

0 

I  p  t  e  a 

a  p  d  0  c   e 

480 

0  c  a  n  c  h 

I  a 

s  0  m 

t 

X 

s  V  a  cN 

r  z   I    r  z  a 

504 

a  r  b  I  Zm 

I  I 

1  p . 

z 

s 

I  0  d  a  0 

1  n   r  z  fm 

528 

0  p  an  a  I 

am 

s  m  a 

P 

d 

a  1  t  t  d 

n  a  d  1   re 

552 

d  0  1  op  I 

n  I 

a   n  b 

a 

d 

IX  0  m  0 

n  s    I  0  s  p 

576 

r  X  pa  0  c 

S  I 

Z      I    X 

P 

0 

od  X  z  I 

a  p  a  n  I    i 

600 

a  X  t  I  r  V 

a    s 

t    r   I 

m 

r 

g  0  a  n  « 

q  a  c  r  a  r 

#   <  «  • 

.  tht, 

1 6  J  true  "Eolation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABionSy  vp'ith  Spirits^  dec, 

The  black^Crof,  it  right ,  and  needeth  no  Mending.    But  thus  much  I  do  ^  to  let  thee 

rnJerHand,  that  thou  wayeji  conf^der  thy  felfto  be  a  man  :  And  beneath  this  underHanding^  un- 
Irfs  thou  fubmit  all  into  the  hands  of  God ,  for  his  fakes  vho  elfe  leaving you^  all  ttal^ed,  pro- 
videth  in  hk  creatures  to  hit  own  gl.ry. 

Car  a  tihi  uxor,carior  tibi  fapientia,chariUimiftibi  ego  fmn.Eledus  tremis^^hefitandt 

feccof  :  Noli  igitur  adgeniim,&  carmen  fapere;  fed  obtetnpera  mihi :  duQor  enim  Turn  fum  & 
autorfpiritus  omnium.  Rec  omnia  a  me  funt,  &  Itcita  vobis. 

J  ttdmonijhyou  as  the  children  of  God,  to  confideryour  vocation,  and  the  love  of  God 

rewards  you;  and  net  to  prefer  your  reafon  before  the  mfdome  of  the  higheji,wbofe  mercy  it  fo  great 
tcwardsyou.  That  you  are  chofen  from  the  number  of  men  to  walk  with  him,  and  to  un- 
derftand  his  myfteries  ,  and  with  all  to  execute  his  juftice  and  praife  throughout  the  Na- 
tions and  people  of  the  earth.  Confider  that  if  he  finde  you  obSlinate,  the  plagues  ofhaynous 
finners,and  contemners  of  the  gifts  of  God  Jhall  fall  uponyou  ,  to  your  great  over thr 019  :  1  hit  is 
the  laji  time  of  your  trial.  Therefore  jhew  your  felves  lovers  of  him  that  hath  led  you,  and  co- 
vered you  with  a  mighty  Jhield  :  Or  jhortly  look,  for  the  reward  offuch,  at  have  contemned  the 
Wifdome  and  Majejty  of  the  Highejl. 


I  Raphael,  counfel you  to  mah^  a  Covenant  with  the  Higheft ,   and  to  ejleem  hit  wings 
more  then  your  own  lives, 

^.  When  E.K.  had  brought  me  thefe  things  ,  I  greatly  rejoyced  in  fpirit,  and  was  ut- 
terly refolved  to  obey  this  new  Doftrine  to  us,  peculiarly  ,  of  all  people  of  the  world  en- 
joyncd.     Aud  after  fome  little  difcourfc  and  conference  hereof ,  wc  went  to  bed,  this 

J  prill's  20.  2©.  day  of  April,  at  night. 


Aprilis  21. 


A.  Thus,  am  I  refolved,  O  Almighty  God,  as  concerning  the  cafe,  fo  hard  to  flefti  and 
blood,  to  be  refolved  in,  thus  :  And  thus  I  defire,  that  we  all  four,might  with  one  niinde 
and  confent,  otFer  and  prefent  unto  thee,  this  writing  as  a  Vow,  Promife,and  Covenant, 
if  it  fo  pleafe  thy  divine  majefty  to  accept  it. 

W''EE  four  (whofe  heads  appeared  under  one  Chryftalline  Crown,  in  one  pillar  uni- 
ted, and  iuclofed)  do  moft  humbly  and  heartily  thank  thee,0  Almighty  God  (our 
Creator,  Redeemer  and  Sanftifier)  for  all  thy  mercies  and  benefits  hitherto  received,  in 
our  perfons,  aud  in  them  that  appertain  unto  us :  And  at  this  prefent,  do  faithfully  and 
fuicerely  confefs ,  and  acknowledge  ,  that  thy  profound  wifdome  in  thit  7noJi  new  and 
firange  doiirine  (among  Chriftians  )  propounded,  commended,  and  enjoyned  unto  us 
four  only,  is  above  our  humane  reafon  ,  and  Chrijiian  Jrofejjitn  to  like  of  :  For  that  in  out- 
ward fhew  of  words,   it  feemeth  to  us  exprefly  to  be  contrary  to  the  purity  and  chaftity, 
which  of  us,  and  all  Chriftians,  thy  followers,  iscxa£Uy  required.    Notwithftanding,we 
will,  herein,  captivate,  and  tread  under-foot  all  our  humane  timorous  doubting  of  any 
inconvenience  ,  which  (hall,  or  may  fall  upon  us,  or  follow  us  in  this  world,  or  in  the 
world  to  come,  in  refpeftor  by  reafon  of  ourimbracingof  this  Doftrine,  liftened  unto, 
of  us,  as  delivered  from  our  true  and  living  God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  andearth;  who 
only  hath  the  true  original  power  and  Authority  of  fins  releafing  and  difcharging  : 
And  whofc  pardoning,  and  not  imputing  of  lin  unto  us,  through  our  lively  faith  in  the 
moft  worthy  merit,  and  precious  blood  of  the  Lamb  Immaculate,  ftiedfor  us,  is  and  fcall 
be  our  juftification  and  falvation.  We,  therefore    (according  to  bleffed  Raphael  his  coun- 
fel laft  given)  moft  humbly  and  Imcerely  require  thy  Divine  Majefty  ,  to  accept  this  our 
Covenant  with  thee  (  for  that,  thy  merciful  promifcs  made  unto  us ,  may  be  to  us  per- 
formed ;  and  thy  divine  purpofes  in  us  and  by  us,  may  be  furthered,  and  advanced  and 
fulfilled.)     That,  as  we  acknowledge  thy  divine  wifdome  and  grace  offered  unto  us  in 
this  thy  laftmyftical  Admoniihnient  :  And  dort  moft  earneftly  will  us  to  accept  the  fame, 
as  lawful  and]  II ji  with  t^ffjWhich'Admouifhment  ftandeth  upon  two  parts  :  That  is  to  wit, 
upon  our  true  Chriftian  charity  fpiritual  between  us  four,  and  alfo  upon    the  Matrimo- 
nial licenceand  liberty,  indifferently  among  us  four  to  be  ufed  :   So  we  the  fame  four 
(which  hereunto  will  fubfcribe)  covenant  with  thy  Divine  Majefty  ,  upon  the  two  prin- 
cipal refpcfts  before  reheai-fed,  truly  and  unfainedly  to  accept  and  perform  hencefor- 
ward amongft  us  four,  in  word,thought  and  deed ,   Chriftian  charity,  and  perfeft  friend- 
fliip,and  all  that  belongeth  thereto  :  And  as  for  the  Matrimonial-like  iiccuce,and  liberty, 

we 


A  true "B^ation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  JBions,  i»ith  Spirits,dca        *  ly 


vvc  accept  and  allow  of  ir,  andpiomife  unto  thcc  (O  our  God)  to  fulfill  tlicfamejin  fuch 
fort,  as  flit  godly  are  pemiitted  to  fulfill,  and  have  been  by  divers  teftimonics  com- 
mended for,  and  by  Divine  doftrine  willed  to  fulfill,  in  Matrimonial  converfation,when- 
foever  thy  motions  and  allurements  (Matrinionial-likeJ  (hall  draw  and  perfwadc  any 
couple  of  us,  Befceching  thee,  as  thou  art  the  onely  true  Almighty  and  Everlaftin^ 
God,  Gireator  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  Thou  wile,  in  thy  infinite  mercies  ,  not  impute  it 
untousforfin,  blindnefs,rafhnefs,  or  preftmiption  ,  being  not  accepted,  done, or  per- 
formed upon  carnal  lult,  or  wanton  concupifcence;  But  by  the  way  of  Abrahaw-liye 
faith  and.  obedience.,  unto  thee,  our  God,  our  Leader,  Teacher,  Protcftor  and  Juftifier, 
now  and  for  ever.  And  hereunto  we  call  the  holy  Heavens  to  be  witneflTes  ,  for  thy  ho- 
nour and  glory  (O  Almighty  God)  and  our  difcharge,  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 


1  Edward  KeUy  by  good  and  provident  (according to  the  Laws 
and  ordinances  of  God)  determination  and  confideration  in  thefe 
former  A6i  ions,  that  is  to  fay,  appearings,  fhevvs  made,  and  voyces 
uttered,  by  the  within  named  in  this  Book  ,  and  the  refl  whatfoever 
Spirits  have  from  the  beginning  thereof( which  at  large  by  the  Records 
appeareth)  not  only  doubted  and  difliked  their  infinuations  and  do- 
(51  rine  uttered,  but  alfo  divers  and  fundry  times  (  as  coveting  to  eif- 
chew  and  avoid  the  danger  and  inconvenience  that  might  either  by 
them,  their  felves,  or  the  drift  of  their  dodrine  enfue ,  or  to  my 
indamagemcnt  divers  wayes,  happen)  fought  to  depart  from  the  ex- 
ercifes  thereof  :  and  withal  boldly  ( as  the  fervant  of  the  Son  of 
God)  inveighed  againft  them  ;  urging  them  to  depart,  or  render  bet- 
ter reafon  of  their  unknown  and  uncredible  words  and  Speeches  de- 
livered \  and  withall  often  and  fundry  times  friendly  exhorted  the 
Right  Worfhipful  Mafter  JOHN  DEE  (the  chief  follower  thereof) 
as  alfo  in  the  Records  appeareth,  to  regard  his  fouls  health,  the  good 
proceeding  of  his  wordly  credit  (which  through  Europe  is  great)  the 
better  maintenance  to  come  of  his  wife  and  children  ,  to  beware  of 
them,and  withall  to  give  them  over  :  wherein  although  I  friendly  and 
brotherly  laboured,  my  labour  feemed  to  be  loft  and  counfel  of  him 
defpifed  ,  and  withall  was  urged  with  replies  to  the  contrary  by  him 
made,  and  promifes,  in  that  cafe,  o'f  the  lofs  of  his  fouls  health,  if  they 
were  not  of  God  :  Whereunto  upon  as  it  were  (bme  farther  tafte  of 
them,  or  opinion  grounded  upon  the  frailty  of  zeal,  he  ceafed  not  al- 
fo to  pawn  unto  me  his  foul,  &c.  which  his  perfwafions  were  the 
chief  and  onely  caufe  of  my  this  fo  long  proceeding  with  them  :  And 
now  alfo  at  this  inftant ,  and  before  a  few  dayes  having  manifeft  oc- 
cafion  to  think  they  were  the  fcrvants  of  Sathan  ,  and  the  children 
of  darknefs  ■■,  becaufc  they  manifeftly  urged  and  commanded  in  the 
name  of  God  a  Do&inc  Damnable  ,  and  contrary  to  the  Laws  of 
God,  his  Commandements  ,  and  Gofpcl  by  our  Saviour  Chrift  as  a 
Touchftone  to  us  left  and  delivered  ,  did  openly  unto  them  diflike 
their  proceeding,  and  brotherly  admonifhcd  the  faid  Worfhipful, 
and  my  sjood  friend  Mr.jOHN  DEE  to  beware  of  them  :  And  now 
having  juft  occafion  to  determine  what  they  were ,  to  confider  all 

C  c  c  thefe 


1 8        A  true  %clatwn  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JHicm,  mth  Spirits,  6cc. 


thcfe  things  before  mentioned  by  me,and  wiicly  to  leave  thenij  and  the 
rather  becaufeoi  themrelves,they  (as  that  by  their  own  words  appear- 
eth)  upon  our  not  following  that  Do61rine  delivered,  gave  unto  us  a 
§luietm  eji  ,   or  pafport  of  frecdome  :   But  the  Books  being  broupjit 

^'^^r/'"' forth*,  after  fome  difcourfe  therein  ,  after  a  day  or  two  had,  and 
their  words  perufcd  fpoken  heretofore,  did  as  it  were  (bccaufe  of  the 
poffible  verity  thereof,  Deo  enim  omnia  fn?2t  poffibilia'^  gave  us  caufe 
of  further  deliberation  :  fo  that  thereby,  I  did  partly  of  my  (cl^,  and 
partly  by  the  true  meaning  of  the  faid  Mr.  DEE  in  the  receiving  of 
them,  as  from  God  :,  and  after  a  fort  by  the  zeal  I  faw  him  bear  unto 
the  true  worfhip  and  glory  of  God  to  be  (  as  that  was  by  them ,  pro- 
mifed)  by  us  promoted,  defcend  from  my  lelf ,  and  condefcend  unto 
his  opinion  and  determination,  giving  over  all  reafon,  or  whatfoever 

"^'^^  for  the  love  of  God  :    But  the  women  difliked  utterly  th'ii  la/1  Do- 

^rine,  and confultingamongftthemfelves  gave  us  this anfwer  ,  the 
former  a6lions  did  nothing  offend  them  but  much  comforted  them  : 
and  therefore  this  laft,not  agreeing  with  the  reft  (which  they  think  to 
be  according  to  the  good  will  and  wholefome  LawofGod)  maketh 
them  to  fear,  becaufe  it  exprefly  is  contrary  to  the  Commandement 
of  God  :  And  thereupon  d^firing  God  not  to  be  offended  with 
their  ignorance,required  another  a6}ion  for  better  information  here- 
ini  in  the  mean,  vowing,  fafting,  and  praying  ,  Mrs.  DEE  hath  cove- 

An  aftiou  nanted  with  God  to  abftain  from  the  eating  of  fiih  and  ileffi  until! 

required     |^jg  Divine  Majefty  fatisfie  their  mindes  according  to  his  Laws  efta- 

men.^^^°   bliflied  ,  and  throughout  all  Chriftendome  received.     To  this  their 
requeft  of  having  an  a^lion,  I  abfolutely  anfwer  ,   that  my  ftmplicity 
before  the  Highcft  is  fuch  as  I  truft  will  excufc  me  :   And  becaufe 
the  fumme  of  this  Doftrine,  given  in  his  name  ,  doth  require  obedi- 
ence which  I  have  (as  is  before  written)  offered ,  I  think  my  felf  dif- 
charged  :  And  therefore  have  no  farther  caufe  to  hazzard  my  felf 
any  more  in  any  adion.  Wherefore  I  anfwer  that  if  it  be  lawful  for 
them  to  call  this  Do6lrine  in  queftion  ,  it  is  more  lawful  for  me  to 
doubt  of  greater  perril  •■,  confidering  that  to  come  where  we  are  ab- 
folutely anfwered  were  folly  ,  and  might  redound  unto  my  great  in-  Ajj 
convenience.        Therefore   befeeching   God  to  have  mercy   upon  >|H 
me ,  and  to  fatisfie  their  Petitions,  doubts  and  vows ,  I  finally  an-  ^ 
fwer ,  that  I  will  from  this  day  forward  meddle   no  more  herein. 
11.  of  April,      1587. 

By   me 

EDWARD  KELLY. 


Aprilis 


A  true  delation  of  Dr.  Dee  hu  JBions,  mth  Spirits ^&:c.  * .  p 


Aprilis  24.         Trebona,  ^Ff''  m 

1  I  rndav. 


Friday 


W^i 


Rayeis  to  God  Jiiade   in  rcfpeft  of  this  ftrange  and  new  doftrine,  requiring  his 
Divine  Majcfty  to  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  tpgive  us  vvifdom  and  faith   that  we 


may  herein  pleafe  him  ;  and  that  we  cannot  finde  how  we  may  do  the  thing  required, 
tfiwgcoMtr^ry  totheLawsof  Mo/f^,  Chrift,  his  Church,  and  of  all  Nations.  Therefore 
feeing  God  is  wot  coKtr/irjr  to  hinifelf,  we  delired  that  we  might  not  be  contrary  to  him 
or  his  Laws,  &c. 

A.  Not  long,  lo,  there  appeared  a  great  flame  of  fire  in  the  principal  Stone,  (both 
ftanding  on  the  Table  before  E.IT.)  which  thing  though  he  told  me,  I  made  no  end  of  my 
Prayer  to  God.  And  behold,  fuddenly  one  feemed  to  come  in  at  the  fouth  window  of 
the  Chappel,  right  againftE.K.  (But  before  that,  the  ftone  was  heaved  up  an  handful 
high,  andfet  down  again  well,  which  thing  E.K.  thought  did  lignifie  fonie  ftrange  mat- 
ter toward.)  Then  after,  the  man  that  came  in  at  the  window  feemed  to  have  his  nether 
yarts  inacloud,  and  with  fpred-abroad  arms  to  come  toward  E./C,  At  which  fight  he 
ihrinked  back  fomewhat,  and  then  that  Creature  took  up  between  both  his  hands  the 
|fo«e  rfwi  fr/z»«  «/ go/^,  and  mounted  up  away  as  he  came..  E.K.  catched  at  it,  but  he 
could  not  touch  it.  At  which  thing  being  fo  taken  away,  and  at  the  fight  thereof  E.K. 
was  in  a  great  fear  and  trembling,  and  had  trfworrw  cordis  for  a  while.  5ut  I  was  very 
glad  and  well  pleafed. 

«^  Here  appeareth  afire  in  this  other  floncalfo,  and  a  man  in  the  fire,  with  flaxen  h^ir 
hanging  down  upon  him,  and  is  naked  unto  his  Paps  j  and  feemeth  to  have  fpots  of 
blood  upon  him.    He  fpake,  and  faid  as  followech. 

If  I  had  intended  to  have  overthrown  youy  or  brought  yontoconfufiofi,  or  fuffered  youto  he  Clr^liuS' 
lei  into  tmipation  beyond  your  Jheugth  and  pover,  then  had  the  Sets  long  ago  fwalhwed 
yoy.     Tea,  there  had  net  a  foul  lived  amongfi  you. 

But  the  law  and  tidings  (to  mankinde')  of  glainefs,  are  both  grounded  in  wf,  I  am  the  Be-  The  Law  & 
ginning  and  the  Ending :  And  behold,  happy  it  he  that  delighteth  in  me,  for  in  me  is  truth  and  die  Golpd. 
under jianding.    Whatfoever  you  have  received,  you  have  received  of  me ;  and  without 
me  you  have  received  nothing.     Behold,  I  my  felf  was  even  the  figure  of  mifery  and 
death  for  your  fins.     JVhy  (therefore')  difdainyou  to  be  figured  after  me  ?    I  will  gather  the 
four  quarters  of  the  earth  together,  and  they  (hall  become  one. 

And  as  I  have  made  you  the  figure  of  two  people  to  come,  and  amongft  them,  the  a.  andE./T. 
executors  of  my  Juftice  :  Ho  likswife  have  I  fanSified  you  in  an  holy  Ordinance,  giving  you  a  figure  of 
the  firft  fruits  of  the  time  to  come.     Happy  is  he  that  is  *  Serpent  in  the  vildernefs  hanged  ^^^o  people 
'Up  upon  the  Crofs,  being  the  will  and  figure  of  my  determination,  and  Kingdom  to  come :  I  am  ^°  ion'C. 
'even  in  the  doors  ;  and  I  will  overthrow  all  flejh.  I  will  ho  more  delight  in  the  fons  of  men. 

^  Contrary  to  my  felf,  I  tetch  you  nothing.  A.  »Heanf- 

For  this  Doftrine  is  not  to  be  publifhed  to  mortal  men  :  but  is  given  unto  you,  to  wcreth  to  a 
nianifeft  your  faith,  and  to  make  you  worthy  in  the  fight  of  the  heavens,for  believing  in  phrafe  of  my 
me  of  your  vocation  to  come.  prayer  or 

'therefore  I  fay  unto  you,  Ktjoyce,  send  he  not  careful  for  ta  morrow  :  for  I,  even  I,  have  d^rcourfe, 
provided  for  you  :    Sin  no  more.  T"'*  "0<itrin 

Behold  !  None  of  the  Orders,  either  of  Heaven  or  Earth,  are  armed  to  open  their  mouthes  in  '*i^°(^"^^ 
vty  Name,  teaching  er  opening  this  DoUrine,  tinlefs  it  were  of  me,  for  I  am  the  Firfland  the  j^'^^'L    ^° 
Laft.     And  I  wiU  be  Shepherd  over  aU,  that  the  Kingdom  tf' my  Father  may  come,  and  that  my       j^fote] 
Spirit  may  be  upon  all  flerti,  where  there  JhaU  be  no  law,  nor  need  of  light :  I  my  felf  am  their  ^^^^  pakor 
lanthorn  for  ever.  _  ^^^  ur.Hru  o- 

And  behold,!  will  be  as  a  Rock  between  you  and  the  teeth  of  Leviathan,  which  feek-  ^j^. 
cth  tofet  you  afundsr^  and  to  bring  you  toconfufion.  Co>iatus  Di- 

And  I  am,  and  am  holy,  and  holtnefs  it  felf  :  Out  of  mectmethno  unclean  thing.  tkoll. 

For  even  at  the  time  of  Mofes  wm  wonderful  to  all  the  Gentiles,  even  fo  fliall  thofe  days  Mofes. 
to  come  be  unto  the  Nations  and  Kings  of  the  earth.     I  am  a  law  for  ever.    And  behold, 
power  is  given  unto  me  from  above  :  And  I  have  vifited  the  earth,  tni  have  thrown  my  curfe  Sterility] 
vponher  :  And  lo,  Jhe  fhall  become  barren.  Terr  a. 

He  that  fajieth  and  frayetk  doth  hut  that  vhich  is  commanded  :  He  that  alfo  fulfilleth  n^ 
wiU,  is  pniified  before  me  :  for  who  if  he  that  raifeth  up,  or  who  is  he  that  cajleth  down  ?  Tea, 
even  lit  is  that  have  tak^n  you  four  Trees  out  of  the  forreji  of  the  world,  and  have  covered  The  jhew  cf 
ytu  hitherto  with  my  wings.     And  behold,  this  that  is^  tai^n  away  fliall  be  rejiored  again  to  you  4  trees,what 
with  more  power.     And  Might  fb all  be  in  ir,  and  a  brejiplate  unto  you,  of  Judgement  and  '.tmeaneth. 

Knowledge.  ^'^T^' ^ 

And  if  there  he  any  of  ytu  that  feekfth  a  Miracle  at  my  bands,3.nd  believeth  in  my  words,  ^^miinmor 
let  him  or  her  frefcnt  themfelves  here  the  next  Monday,  with  the  refl,  and  he  (Ijall  perceive  that  ^«*"»*»"»» 
/  wmthe  Judge  of  Abirani»  and  the  Cod  of  Abraham  :  Walk  before  me  as  the  fons  of  my       "^' 

C  c  c  2  Father, 


*  20        A  true  'Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Jdwm,  ntth  Spirit s^  6c  c. 


Father,  in  all  rig'atroiifneft.     And.  fo .low you  that  which  you  call  uniighceoiihicfs  even 

wich  gladnels  :  jor  I  can  make  you  whiter  then  [now. 
Our  unity  of        Your  unity  and  knitting  together  is  the  end  and  confummation  of  the  beginning  of 
■vvhacimpor-  my  harveft.     I  will  not  dally  with  you,  hn  I  will  bt  mighty  in  de^d  amongH  you.     And  to,  I 
tancc  u  !S ;    ffiU  jhortly  open  your  eyes,  and  you  jhalt  fee:  And  I  will  pj,  ARISE,  and  you  Jhall  g* 
efi  fi'iis  fx-  q;ix.     What  I  am,  I  am, 

fftiT^"       E.K.  The  flame  and  all  is  dilappeared. 

'The  ancient  A.  Gloria  P:itri,  &  Filio,  &  Sfirttui  Sando,  ficut  erat  iiiprinci^io,&  nunc,  &  in  fem- 

token  ar.d  ptema  f^culorum  fdcula.    Amen, 

watchword  p  V" 

vs:  Ar'.fe-)  ^''^"^  ^ft^""'  ^^^^  ^^^  ^*^^y  ^^^ "^  ^^  ^'^^  ^  ^"^  ^^^^^  ^^^"  ^™°^  ^'^  ^"^  Ao^n 

come  and  fee  uuto  all  his  parts,  his  privities  and  thighs. 

my  ]iidge-  Deo  Omnipotenti,  Mifericordi  &  Kegi  feculorum  fit  onmit  lam,  honor  &  gloria,  nunc  & 

r//e/iis.  femper.     Auien. 


J.D.  E.K.  J.D.  J.K. 

'u4pri/is  I?.  T^-w-  J  ££  {-Q^jj.  ^vvhofe  heads  appeared  under  one  Chryftalllne  Crown,  and  in  one  pillar 
«»«.I587.       \\/  united  and  enclofed)  do  molt  humbly  and  heartily  ihank  thee  (O  Almighty  God, 
our  Creator,  Redeemer  and  Sanftitier)  for  all  thy  mercies  and   benches  hitherto  recei- 
'  ved  in  our  own  perfons,  and  in  them  that  appertain  unto  us  :   And  at  this  prefent  do 
faithfully  and  lincerely  confefs  and  acknowledge,  that  thy  profound  wifdom  in  this  moft 
new  and  Ihange  Doftrnie  (among  Chrillians)  propoimded,  commended  and  enjoyned 
inito  us  four  onely,  is  above  our  humane  Ktalbn,  and  our  Cathohck  Chriftian  Profeiriou 
to  like  of:  for  that,  in  outward  Ihew  of  words,  it  feemeth   to  us  exprefly  to  be  contrary 
to  the  purity  and  chaftity  which  of  us  and  all  Chriftians^thy  followers)  is  exaftly  requi- 
red.    NotwithftandmgjWe  will  for  thy  fake  herein  captivate  and  tread  under  foot  all  our 
huiKanc  timerous  doubting  of  any  inconvenience  which  fhall  or  may  fall  upon  us,  or 
follow  us  (in  this  world,  or  in  the  world  to  come)  in   refpeft,  or  by  reafon  of  our  era- 
bracing  or  ihis  Doftrine,  liftued  unto  of  us,  as  delivered  from  thee,  our  true  and  living 
God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  onely  haft  the  true  original  power  and  au- 
thority of  fins  releaiing  and  dilcharging  ;  and  whofe  pardoning,  or  not  imputing  of  lia 
unto  us,thiough  our  lively  faith  in  the  moft  worthy  Merit  and  precious  Blood  of  thy  Lamb 
immaculate,  filed  for  us,  IS  and  ftiall  be  our  Juftificarion  and  Salvation.     Wc  thcrerore, 
■AprHli  2o.  (according  to  bleffed  Raphael  his  counfcl  lately  given)  moft  humbly  and  lincerely  i  e- 
riocte  pro-    '  quire  thy  divine  Majefty  to  accept  this  ourCovenant  with  thee  (to  the  intent  ihat  all  thy 
ffiBda.  merciful  and  gracious  promifes  made  unto  us  four,  and  any  of  us,  may  be  to  us  perfoi  in- 

ed  :  and  alfo  that  thy  divine  purpofcs  in  us,  and  by  us,  may  be  furthered,  advanced  and 
fulfilled)  That  as  we  acknowledge  thy  divme  wifdom  and  giace  opened  unto  us  in  this 
thy  laft  myftical  Admonilhmcnt  of  univerfal  uniry  to  be  between  us  :  And  doftmoft  in- 
ftantly  and  carneitly  will  us  to  accept  and  life  the  Tame,  as  both  myltically  moft  needful, 
and  alfo  lawful  and  juft  with  thee  :  (which  Adiiiouilhineutftandei.h  upon  two  parts  ;  that 
is  to  wit,  upon  true  and  confummate  Chriftian  Charity  between  us  four  unviolably  to  be 
kept.  And  alfo  upon  the  New  Macrimoinal-like  licence  and  liberty  indifferently  amongfl 
us  four  to  be  ufed  :)  So  we  the  fame  four  above-named  (which  hereunto  will  alfo  fub- 
fcribeour  Names)  do  this  day  Covenant  with  thy  Divu.e  Majefty  ('jeiides  all  other  re- 
»  Before  at    fpefts,  chiefly  upon  the  two  principal  intents  and  refpefts  *  before  here  reherfed)  truly 
ihismaik.      andunfeignedly  to  accept  and  perform  hcncefoi-wardamongft  us  four  (in  word,  thought 
and  deed,  to  the  uttermoftandbeft   of  our  power)  a  perfeft  unity,  and  with  incompa- 
rable true  love  and  good  Chriftian  Charity,  fnendlhip,  imparting  and  communicating 
each  unto  other,  all  and  whatfoever  we   have  or  fhuU  have  hereafter  during  our  lives. 
And  as  for  the  Matrimonial-likc  licence,  we  accept  and  allow  of  it  :  And  piomife  unto 
thee  (O  our  God,  the  Alniigliiy,  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth)  to  fulfil  the  fame  in  fuch 
fort  as  the  goJly  are  permii  ted  to  fulfilj  and  have  been  (by  divers  teftimonie'>)  commen- 
ded for,  and  by  divmeDoftnne  willed  to, fulfil  in  Matrimonial-like  converfation,  when- 
focver  chy  motions  and  allurements  Matrimonial-likc  ihall  draw  and  perfwadc  any  couple 
of  us  ther*:unto  :  Btfeechingthee,  as  thou  art  the  onely,  true  Almighty  and  everlafting 
God,  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth.  Thou  wilt  in  thy  infinite  mercies  not  impute  it  unto 
usforhn,  blindnefs,  raftinefs  orprefumption;  being  not  accepted,  done  or  performed  of 
us  upon  carnal  luft,  orwanton  concupifcence,  but  by  the  way  of  Ahraham-Ukc  faith  and 
obeaience  unco  thee  our  God,  our  Leader,  Teacher,  Proteftor  and  Juftifier,  now  and 
for  ever.    And  hereunto  we  moft  humbly  and  faithfully  require  thy  Divine  Majefty  to  be 
ourwitnelb:  Andmoreover  we  call  thy  holy  Angels,  aud  to  bear  record  for  thy  honour 

and 


A  true  %rlation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  r^tth  Spirit i^^c. 


«r  1 


and  glory,  and  tor  ourdifchaigc,  now  and  for  evei-.  And  for  a  further  confiinuTiatiou 
of  this  New  Covenant  on  our  behalf,  (by  thy  will  and  perniilTion)  made  with  thtc  (the 
God  of  heaven  and  earth)  we  the  fame  four  Hrrt  notified,  and  particularly  and  vulgarly- 
named  J  oif^w  Pr'f,  E^M'^rri /Cf//fj,  Jane  T>ee,  and  Jone  Ke/lejj  have  faithfully,  obediently. 
Willingly  -and  wittingly  fubfcribed  our  Names  wkh  our  own  hands  day  of  Mrfy, 

Jmo  i-^^y.     In  TreboM  C3.i\le. 

A:\A  finally,  as  thou  haft  warned  us  (O  God)  that  this  doftrineand  doings  fhould  un- 
to no  mortal  man  elfe  be  difclofcd^  but  among  us  onely  the  above-named  four  to  be 
kst^t  w'*Jt  fecrct  :  and  haft  faid,  that  whofoever  of  us  ftiould  by  any  means  difclofe  the 
fame,  a;  d  he  alfo  or  fhe  to  whom  the  fame  fliould  be  difclofed,  (hould  prefently  and  im- 
niediatcly  be  ftrucken  dead  by  thy  Divine  power  :  So  we  all  and  every  of  us  four  do  re- 
c^ueftihce  moft  carneftly,  and  Covenant  with  thee  as  our  God,  that  fo  all  this  doftrine 
and  doing  may  be  kept  moft  hid  and  fecret ;  and  alfo  that  thefudden  and  immediate  bo- 
dily death  may  light  and  fall  on  the  difclofer,  and  on  him  or  her  to  whom  the  fame  do- 
ftnne  or  doing  any  manner  of  way  fhall  be  difclofed  or  known.     Amen,  Amen^  Amen. 

John    dee. 

Note  and  remember.  That  on  Sunday  the  third  of  May,  Ann.\'^%j.  (by  the  new  ac- 
count) I  John  Dee,Edward  Kelley^znd  our  two  wives,covenanted  with  Gocl,and  fubfcribed 
the  lame,  for  indiffoluble  and  inviolable  unities,  charity  and  friendftiip  keeping  between 
us  four,  and  all  things  between  us  to  be  common,  as  God  by  fimdry  means  willed  us  to 
do.      Ad  Vet  honorem^  laudetn  &  gloriam  in  fide  &  ohedieniie-  FaQum  ejio,       Anun. 


1587.  Inbona,  in  the  fine  Chappel.  ^^tllk^,, 

a  Meridte. 
A.  'TpHe  forefaid  Covenant  being  framed  by  me  JohnDee^  as  near  as  I  could  according 
X  to  the  intent  and  faith  of  us  required,  to  be  notified  and  declared  by  the  works 
of  unity  both  fpiritual  and  corporal.  Now  it  was  by  the  women  as  by  lur  [elves  thought  ne- 
cejfary  to  nndcrjiand  the  will  of  God  and  hit  good  fleafure,  IVheiher  thit  Covenant  utii  form  of 
w  rds  ferjor»!ed,  is  and  will  be  acceptable,  and  according  to  the  well  liking  of  his  Divine 
Miijefty  :  And  that  hereupon,  the  aft  of  corporal  knowledge  being  performed  on  both  our 
paris.  It  will  pleaie  his  Divine  Majefty  to  fcal  and  warrant  tinto  tu  moji  ctrtainly  andjpee- 
dily  all  hii  Divine,  Merciful  and  bountiful  Promifes  and  Blejlings ;  and  alfo  promifcs  us  wif- 
dome,  knowledge,  ability  and  power  to  execute  his  juftice,  and  declare  and  demonftrate 
his  infallible  verity  amongft  men,  to  his  honour  and  glory. 

Hereupon  E.K.  and  I  went  to  the  Chappel  to  the  South  Table.  a.  To  thi-s  intent  I 
prayed  to  the  Almighty  God,  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  fatherly,  favourably  and 
mercifully  to  regard  the  finglenefsand  ftraits  of  my  heart,  defiring  him  to  encreaie  the 
faith,  and  to  open  the  eyes  of  my  heait,  that  I  may  fee  Of  era  digitorum  &  miralilia  ejus, 
nobit  ftcuti  neceffaria,  for  his  fcrvice  and  glory,  and  for  the  confufion  and  overthrow  of  his 
enemies.     Amen, 

I  read  over  the  Covenant  (yerbntim')  before  the  Divi-.c  Tilajefty,  and  his  holy  Angels. 

Taufa  \hor(e, 

E.  K.   Here  appeareth  Madimi. 

As  a  thing  like  a  head  with  three  eyes  cometh  upon  her  head,  and 
one  of  the  eyes  feem  to  come  one  into  another. 

Mad Pepgijiis. 

A.  Pepigimuf. 

Ratumeft:  fernmftte  fjtnt  vobit  omnia  communia. 

Beiy  Hon  hommis  eftete :  Promiffa  qu£  funt^  fojjidtte  :  Vobit  dejlinata,  vera  funt  ; 

Mternus  fum. 

E.  K.   She  is  gone. 

E.K.  My  thought  an  infinite  number  of  fpiritual  Creatures  ftood 
afar  off  bchinde  her  like  as  in  an  half  Moon. 

^.  im  qui  JEtcrnus  elf  Omniptens^Safiens^Bonus,  Verus,  Mifericors,&rerum  omnium  Crea- 
tor^ Redemptor  no\ler  &  Illuminator  omnium  (lumine  vero  Collujiratorum')  Sit  omris  gratianm 
fiSio,  laui.  benedidio,  honor  &  gloria  :  Nunc  &  in  fmfiterna  fdCulorum  fjicula.     Amen. 

treiiontg. 


*  22  Atrue  ^iation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABionSy  mth  Spirits^dcc, 


Ouaji  Chri- 
fins. 


1587.         Tnhona. 


Wedncfday 
morninj; 
M.i'-i  2C. 


Jcfut. 
Figuration 


All  chings 
one* 

ACovenar.: 


9otentld 
mAgn-i  eX 
dto  futuri. 

Figures. 


PK(ces  di  V'^mlnum  Crfatorem  CxU  &  ttrrr,  &c.  Then  as  conccniing  thcCovenaiit 
which  was  made  fuhfcribedand  delivered  in  ,  but  the  next  day  required  again  of  Mr. 
E.K.  and  in  his  wifcs  name  to  put  out  his  name,  8cc.  But  when  he  had  it  ,  he  cut  it  into 
equal  parts;  keeping  that  half  wherein  his  fubfcription  and  his  wifeswerc  ,  and  deliver- 
ed unto  me,  the  other  half  but  after  a  few  dayes  deiired  to  have  the  fight  and  reading  of 
both  together;  and  then  he  kept  the  other  part  from  mealfo  :  But  afterward  Aftf^zwi  did 
with  her  finger  draw  on  the  two  papers  make  them  whole  again,  &c.  and  then  jhe  gave  the  print 
of  mj  CharaQers,  and  [aid  a  red  Circle  jhould  alwayes  appear  in  the  Stone  to  all  mens 
lightjt^c. 

E.  K.  There  is  here  a  great  Globe  of  fire  hanging  in  the  top  of 
the  Stone  i  and  in  the  Globe  a  man  ftanding  with  a  purple  Robe 
like  Chrift,  I  cannot  well  pei  ct  ivc  his  face. 

Jf^ho  fitteth  upon  the  Chzrubins,  a.i\d  it  carried  abroad  with  their  wings  ;  Who  if  be 

that  it  lifted  up  in  thun^ers^  and  in  the  v  >yce  tf  many  waters  exalted  and  magnified  through 
the  power  of  a  Seraphin  (which  is  the  fowr  of  hiv:  that  made  him?  )  JFho  it  he  that  jlretcbetb 
out  hit  arms  and  intbracth  ail  Things  ?  Who  it  he  that  it  not,  and  it  ?  JFb:  is  he  that  numbretb 
the  Stars  Of  the  letters  of  a- V .lumn^  ?  r  entrctb  down  inu  the  waves  ?  In  the  multitude  of 
hit  wonders  who  is  he  that  katbmreth  kit  JVhelps  there  ,  where  the  Sea  gUdeth,  and  kjepeth  them 
in  Chains,  till  the  day  0^'  hit jW etch- forib  potrer  come  .f  IF'^o  it  he  that  mah^th  hit  habitation  in 
the  Sun,  or  fi'Jeth  the  Mo'^n  mth  ap.'rpftualKivers'  JVho  it  hethat  hath  mude  Winter  and  Sum- 
mer, times  and  ffjfons  I.  IFbo^  it  he  th^t  it  the  Lord  of  all  beaHs  and  fowls .?  JVho  it  he  that  hatk 
tnad,'  you  of  nothtnt  ?  evn  he  it  it  that  haihkdycu  cut,  even  he  it  is  that  hath  carried  you 
to  theSc.K  even  he  it  it,  th.it  h.-rth  ^'ptyo'.fleeping  ,  and  pnfervedyou  wakJHg  :  Even  be  it  if 
that  hath  tyed  his  thunders  underneail your  and  hath  hArnijljedyou. 

JVixb  t'^eJVhn-'.ecDind  of  ven^r'anc?  azainll  the  people  of  Ethan  ,  yea  even  be  it  it  (I  fay) 
that  it,  071 J  liveth  fvr  ever  ^  and  hath  provided  yon  ai  the  chief ejl  reapers,  yea  and  over-feers  of 
bit  harvcsi,  w'-ich  hath  ;niede.yon  d  pramjfc  ;_  7hat  the  Kings  of  the  earth  (hall  be  inriched  by  you, 
■  and  bath.mad.^you  free  •''rsm  aii  men  ,-  dgamix  the  day  when  you  jhall  fee  me.  But  Oyou  of  In  tie 
faith  atid  undevji/irtdip^,  0;  I  fcy.yojii  of  little  faith  and  underjianding  ,  how  long  will  you  b» 
your  own  maiiers,  nay  your  owr  fi^-vants,  how  long  do you'contemn  ,  the  profound  and  unfpeaV- 
able  fiOods  of  my  w  fd<.:m,  and  fore-knowledge  in  you. 

H010  long  (i  fay )  wi^you  run  after  your  own  imaginations  and  contemntheprefent  counfels 
which  I  giveyou,hindring  the  power  that  it  ready  to  fall  uponyov,0  yon  of  little  faith  and  undtr- 
Jlandin'T. 

Behold  I  haV'- prepared  a  bajtkft  for  yoUf  and  have  brought  you  even  unto  the  doers;  but  be- 
cavfe you  fr.teli  not  the  fealiyou  difdahi  to  enter,  happy  it  he  that  entreth  in  through  me  :  For  I 
am  the  very  gate  to  all  felicity  and  joy,  and  without  me  it  nothing  .-  Are  you  more  dtfereet  then 
I  am  wife  /  or  more  hsnil  than  I  cm  holy  f  Kighteoiifnefs,and  righteoufnefs  it  that,which  it  re- 
warded with  honour,  Beho'd  I  made  all  things.  Is  it  not  contrary  to  Naturf,  that  the  lights  of 
heaven  lloild  nattd :  IVhy  therefore  at  the  prayer  <•/  the  Carpter  call  you  upon  the  Sun  in  my  name; 
Ca'ui>!Z  (I  fay)  upon  my  name  did  the  Sunjiandftill.  Kebukf  him  therefore  if  he  hath  done  a- 
wifi\  orteachhim,  why  he  fo  uhv'ed  Nature,  Oyou  wretches,  I  fay  unto  you,  you  are  the  lafi  of 
the  beginning  of  the  times  to  com.-,  fo  figured  by  my  determination  and  eternal  purpofe  :  And 
heho.'dihe  Son  and  Moon  Ihali  ijandjiill ,  evenat  your  \0ycci3  and  the  Mountains jhaU  bring 
themfelves  together  before  the  face  of  man,  at  your  commandement,  that  the  people  and  Kings 
of  the  earth  may  fay,  Lo  this  is  the  finger  of  him  tTiat  hath  created  all  things. 

Be  therefore  obedient  and  full  of  faith. 

And  fee  that  all  things  be  one  amongftyou,  andcleave  not  afunder,  lejl  Itakf  vengeance 
uponyoujfov  behold  Sathan  hath  power  to  call  you  afunderjbut  a  little  hejliould- 
be  faithful  therefore,  and  provident,  be  watchful,  and  take  heed  for  you  have  made  a  Covenant; 
and  behold  it  it  written  before  my  face  in  heaven,  even  a*  whatfoever  I  have  fpoken  unto  you, 
is  laid  up  in  my  treafures.  T'ake  heed  that  you  run  neither  to  the  right  hand,neither  to  the  left; 
but  that  yuu  caji  away  your  felvesfo-  me  :  As  I  bumbled  myfelfto  death,  wherein  the  unity  be- 
tween my  Congregation  and  me  ,  WJs  before  my  Father  perpetually  fealed,  whereby  I  am  alwayes 
prefent  with  fucii  as  ^.at  their  truft  in  me.  Even  fo  m  the  Eajl  and  the  lF'eft,the  North,and  the 
South,E{!iU  and  ]dcoh.Jhall  be  gathered  together  through  the.  power  I  will  give  you,and  united 
for  ever  in  the  Kingdome  of  my  Father  which  is  to  come  ,  in  one  holy  and  eternal  fel- 
lovvlliip,fo  beyou  contented  alfo  to  be  the  figures  of  the  things  that  are  tocome  by  you,  that  it 
may  be  a  perpetual  teftimony  before  the  heavens,  and  before  men,  of  your  perfeif  and  found  faith: 
And  thou  J  even  thou  that  hafi  core  in  peeces  tvc/i  thn  morning  again  thit  Covenant  which  thou 

.halt 


A  true  "Ration  of  Dr.  Dee  bu  Actions^  mth  Sfiriti,6zc, 


* 

^ 


hit  ji  made  with  y>ie.  Behold  the  time  Jhall  come  that  ihoii  llialt  be  torninpeeces  thy  fdf,  and  I  will 
turn  even  my  f,ice  away  from  thee  for  a  time  .-  And  even  at  thou  hafi  ohjiinately  and  iznorantly, 
blafphenied  the  company  of  my  holy  mcibg<:r»,even  fjjhal!  the  people  of  the  earthlbjlinatclj 
and  ignorantly  throw  thee  out  from  Town  to  Town  :  And  even  as  thou  haji  done  unto  me,  evtn 
fo  Jhall  tnen  do  v.nto  thee.  But  becaufe  t!iy  miiuHe  was  inwardly  never  to  forfak^eme,  even  fo 
Jhalt  thou  never  be  forfakjn  ofme^  but  I  will  return  again  unto  th,c.  And  now  behold^  thou  liaft 
made  a  bargain^and  behold  thou  thinkelt  co  take  thee  up  a  new  dwelling  place,and  thou 
Ihalt  not  dofo  :  But  who  fo  receiveth  thee  into  hk  houfejball  as  truly  as  I  am  ,  both  he  and 
his  family  fink  down  into  the  very  lake  of  hell.  But  before  thou  enter  in,!  vvill  by  dreams 
and  YiiionsTP;?r« /?i»2;  therefore  run  n'jt  abroad  :  Takf  heed  of  the  Tempter,  Thou  made  a  Co' 
venant  with  me,  which  thou  canft  not  in  breaking  of  the  papers  put  out ;  for  my  regifter  is 
eternal  :  And  thofethat  bear  witnefs  before  me  are  the  compafs  of  my  wing«. 

And  lo  behold  Carpio  hath  for  hii  former  intent  of  fepirating  you  ,  cut  off  the  day  of  his 
Father,  and  is  become  fatherlefs  :  Behold  ft  ey/lhortly  ihall  his  mother  perilhalfo. 

A'ld,  if  heveakei;  he  attempt  any  farther ,  I  will  throw  the  vengeance  of  Jiidice  upon 
him, that  he  fliall  be  a  laughing  flock  to  the  people  amongft  which  he  was  born :  Wo  be 
unto  them  that  rifeth  up  againft  me. 

After  a  while  I  come  again. 

E.  K.     I  thought  we  fliould  have  nothing  elfe,  but 

£i.  1  read  this  over  to  E.K. 

E.  K.   He  is  here  again. 

He  that  pawneth  *  hk  foul  for  me,  lofeth  it  not ,  and  he  that  dyeth  for  we  , 
dietbto  eternal  life.  Behold  you  ^j  all  both  as  Lambs  be  brought  forth  before 
vien  in  your  Utter  day  es ,  andfl^aUbe  overthrown  and  fain  ,  and  y$ur  bodies 
tojfed  to  and  fro  :  But  I  will  revive  you  again,  and  will  be  full  of  power  : 
And  you  Jhall  be  Comforted  with  the  joyes  of  your  brethren ,  for  I  have  many 
that  fecretly  ferve  me  ^  and  whenyou  have  (hewed  your  obedience,  thefecond 
day  after ,  come  here  again  before  me ;  for  I  will  lead  you  into  the  way  of 
Knowledge  and  VnderjHnding  :  And  Judgement  and  Wifdome JhaUhe  upon 
you  ,  and  'Jhall  be  rejiored  unto  you  :  And  you  Jhail  grow  every  day  ,  wife  and  mighty  The  fecret 
in  mee.  ■  ■  ieivants  for 

E.  K.  He  is  gone  :  and  in  going  he  made  a  Crols  (toward  us)  of /°^.;.„,^ 
blefllng. 

Kerum  ewni  Creatori  OmnipoXenti,  Mifericordi  &  Jujio,  Domino  nojiro  &  Deo  nojlro, 
jit  omnklaiu,  honor,  gloria,  gratiarum  actio  &  Jubilatio  :   Nunc  & 
in  fempiterna  f^culorum  fxCula.     Amen. 

lean,  and  byourtwoConfents  ,  and  at  the  requeft  of  Jane  ^•"  unto  the  women. 
And  Mr.E.K.  hereupon  faid  to  his  wife.  That  bis  boots  were  now  put  off,  and  changed  his  pu.r- 
fofe  of  going  away  with  Ctlv^xo  now.  God  confirm  his  minde  in  all  goodpurpofes  according 
to  the  welLplealing  of  the  Higheft.     Amen. 

••••••  A As  I,  and  E.JT.  walked  out  at  the  new  flairs,  into  the  new  Orchard- 
ward  along  the  little  River  to  view  the  fmall  fi(h  ,  and  returning  to  the  fore  flairs  again, 
E.K.  faw  twain  as  high  as  my  fon  Arthur  fighting  by  the  River  fide  with  fwords3  and  the 
one  faid  to  the  other,  thou  haft  beguiled  me  :  Then  I  at  length,  faidunto  them  ,  Can  I 
take  up  the  matter  between  you  ?  one  faid  yea  that  you  can  :  in  what  is  it  quoth  I  ?  Then 
faid  he  ,  I  fent  a  thing  to  thy  wife  by  my  man  ,  and  thit  fellow  hath  tak^en  it  from  him.  Thejr 
fought  fore.and  at  length  ,  he  that  had  it  was  wounded  in  the  thigh,  anditfeemed  to 
bleed.  Afterward  he  that  was  wounded ,  did  bring  a  yellow  fquare  thing  out  of  his  bo- 
fome;  then  I  gueffedittobe  my  Stone  that  was  taken  zviay.The  other  faid  unto  him,let  it  be 
carri^^ijfuddenly  he  feeniedto  have  been  out  of  light,and  to  be  come  again;  hethreatned 
theotherthat  had  wounded  him,  and  faid  he  would  be  even  with  him.  Theother  faid, 
Ha\T  thou  laid  it  under  the  right  pillow  of  the  bed  where  his  wife  lay  yejlernight. 

At  length  they  both  went  ('one  after  another)  into  a  little  Willow  tree  bpdy  on  the 
right  hand  next  the  new  flairs  into  the  garden  ;  the  tree  feemed  to  cleave,  or  open^  and 
they  to  go  in. 

Hereupon  we  wentaway:  And  I  coming  to  mv  Chamber,foifnd  my  wife  lying  upon  her 
bed  (where  I  lay  yefternight)  and  there  I  lifted  up  the  right  pillow  ,  upon  which  Ihe  lay 
refling  herfelf  (being  not  well  at  eafe)  And  in  manner  under  her  flioulders  there  I  found 
my  precious  Stone,  that  was  taken  away  by  Madimi  :  Whereat  E.  K.  greatly  wondred, 
doubtrng  the  verity  of  tlie  ftcw.    But  I  and  my  wife  rejoyced,tkanking  God. 


*  This  was  faid  becaufe  I  had 
parwnedmy  foul,  upon  my  a- 
vovichins^  the  ibiritual  cca- 
tui-cs  which  have  d:alt  wih 
uSjtobe  of  God  and  good: 
which  my  bargain  E-  K-  had 
by  woid  &  wiicin^i  dildain- 
fully  charc^td  J  and  of  late 
threacncd  mewirhall. 


er   poie::' 

tia  iff  Deo. 


Carpio, 

Friday 
afternoon 
alsoiic  four  of 
che  clock. 


Lap;  d.'s 
fnnEli  re- 
ftitHtio* 


Saturday 


z^        A  true  %elatwn  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AUiom,  mth  Spirits,  6cc. 


Saturday  May  25.    Mane  circa  p.  \ 

PReces  ad  Deum  fimdebantury&c  And  then  we  icqucfted  that  the  aft  of  obedience  per- 
foi  nied  (according  to  oiu- faith  conceived  of  our  vocation,  from  the  Almighty  and 
Eternal  God  of  heaven  and  earth)  might  be  accepted  :  And  that  henceforward  we  might 
be  inftrufted  in  the  underftanding  and  prafticc  of  vvifdomej  both  fuch  as  already  we  have 
received  fome  introduftions  Myftical,andalfo  of  all  other  what  the  Almighty  God  Qiall 
deem  meet  for  us  to  know,  and  execute  for  his  honour  and  glory, e^-i:. 

A  E.  K.  'iodX,  Ten  and  Inkf,  and  wrote  the  requeji  here  adjojned;  and  he  read  it  to  me,  and 
he  requeftcd  me  to  read  it  to  the  Divine  M'tjefiy  ;  and  fo  I  did  ,  and  hereupon  we  tpaited 
both  to  thefirji  my  prayer  andfo  thif  Fttiticn,  the  Divine  anfwer, 

£.  Oninipotens  fenipiterne,  vere  6"  vive  Deus  mittof  lucem  tiiam  &  veritatem  twam  tit  ipU 
Hos  ducant  &  ferducant  admonteWy  fancium  Sjon  ,  ex  hac  vaUe  miferia  &  ad  Celejiem  tuam 
Jerufalem.     Amen. 

E.  K.  From  the  beginning  of  this  our  coming,  there  appeared  a 
purple  Circle  as  big  as  a  ftar  in  the  Circumference  of  thje  holy  Stone, 
which  ycfterday  was  brought  again:  And  that  it  fliould  fo  be,  Madimi 
had  forewarned  E.  K.  when  /he  /hewed  it  unto  him ,  when  alfo  /he 
gave  the  prints  of  the  letters  of  the  backfidc  of  the  bottomc  of  the 
gold  frame  of  it. 

*  E.  K.   There  appeareth  here  a  great  man  all  in  bright 

Equus  alius  j^afj^^fg  fitting  Upon  a  white  horfe  :  he  hath  a  fpear  all  fiery  in  his 
left  hand  ,  he  now  putteth  into  his  right  hand  ;  he  hath  a  long  fword 
by  his  fide  :  he  hath  alfo  a  target  hanging  on  his  back,  it  feemeth  to 
be  of  /i:ecl :  It  hangcth  from  his  neck  by  a  blue  lace^it  cometh  up  be- 
hind him  as  high  as  the  top  of  his  head.  The  horfe  is  milk  white , 
all  /luddcd  with  white  :  a  very  comely  horfe  it  is.  The  man  is  in  com- 
pleat  harnefs,the  top  of  his  helmet  hath  a  /harp  form. 

Upon  his  Target ,  are  many  Cherubins  ,  as  it  were  painted  in 
Circles :  there  is  one  in  the  middle  :  About  it  as  a  Circle  with  fix  in 
it,  and  then  a  Circle  with  eight ,  and  then  a  great  Circle  with  ten  in 
^'"*-  it,  and  in  the  greatcfl:  are  twenty  j  and  about  the  Circle  of  twenty 

are  feven  parts  :  at  each  of  which  points  is  a  Cherubin  \  Their 
faces  be  like  burning  gold ,  their  wings  be  more  brighter  and  as  it 
were  their  wings  coming   over  their   heads  do 

Cherubitt.  j^Qj.  fQuch  together.  His  horfe  is  alfo  harnifhed  before  and  be- 
hind. The  horfe  legs  behind  are  harnifhed  as  with  boots  mar- 
veiloufly  contrived,for  defence  as  it  were  of  his  hinde  legs. 

E.  K.  He  is  ridden  away ,  he  feemeth  to  ride  through  a  great 
field. 

E.  K.  Here  is  now  come  Madimi. 

E.  K.  She  is  gone  into  the  field,  that  way  which  he  rode. 

E.  K.  Here  is  another,  like  a  woman  all  in  green. 

E.  K.  Here  cometh  another  woman  :  All  her  attire  is  like  beaten 
goldi,  /he  hath  on  her  forehead  a  Crofschry/lal,  her  neck  and  brea/l 
are  bare  unto  under  her  dugs  :  She  hath  a  girdle  of  beaten 
gold  flackly  buckled  unto  her  with  a  pendant  of  gold  down  to  the 

ground. 

J  am 


J  true  'l^ation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AWonSyMBtth  6pims,6cc,        *  25 


la.M^jjffi^'Dtiughier  of  Fcrtitvie^  and  raviftjed  every  hopr,  from  mj  youtk  For  behold^  I 
Atn  V iidf^^nding,  and  Science  dweUeth  hi  me ;  and  the  heavens  offreR  me,  they  covet  and  defire 
we  tvit :  inpni:e  appetite:  few  or  none  tliat  are  earthly  have  imbraced  me,  for  I  am  Jhadoffed 
wnbthK'  Circle  of  the  Stone ^  and  covered  with  the  morning  Clouds.  My  feet  arf  fwifter  than 
tke  winds,  and  my  hands  are  fweeter  than  the  inorning  dew.  My  garments  axe  from  the  beginning.^ 
and.  my  dwelling  place  is  in  my  felf.  'the  Lion  knoweth  not  where  I  wal\ ,  neither  do  the  heajis 
tf  the  field  underfiandme.  I  am  dejioured,  and  yet  a  virgin  :  'I  funHifie,  dnd  am  not  fmcti-  ' 
fied.  Happy  is  he  that  inibraceth  me  :  for  in  the  night  feafon  I  am  fwect,  a-nd  in  the  day  full  of 
fleafure.  My  company  is  a  harmony  of  many  Cymbals,  and my  lips  fweeter  than  health  it  felf, 
I  am  a  harlot  for  fuch  at  ravi(h  me,  dnd  a  virgin  ygitb  fujoh  as  kjtow  me  not  ;  For  lo,  I  am  loved 
»f  many,  and  I  am  a  lover  to  matfy ;  and  as  many  of  copte  unto  me  as  they  fhould  do,  have  enter-  ■ 
tainment.  Purge  your  jireets^O  ye  fons  of  men,  and  Wiijh  your  houfes  clean  j  ma}^  your  felves 
holy,and  put  on  rigbteoiifnefi.  Cafi  out  your  old  firumpets,  and  burn  their  clothes;  ahftain 
from  the  compiiify  of  other  wAm,?n  that  are  defiled,  that  arefluttifh,  and  not  fo  handfome  and 
beautiful  oi  I,  and  then  will  L  conte  and  dwell  amoHgl}  you  :  and  behold,  Iwdl  bring  forth  chil- 
dren unto  you,  audtheypAllbetbeSonsof  Comfort.  I t^ill  open rirv  'r.irnietixs..  ^ni  iandna." 
kfd  beforeyou,  that  your  love  may  be  more  enfiamed  toward  me, 

Aiyet,Iwalk^  mtla  Clouds;  as yeiy  1  am  carrried  with  theWinai,  anA cannot  dejcendtmto 
yon  for  tke  mvltitude  of  your  abominations,  and  th^e  filthy  loathfomnefs  of  your  dyviUing  places. 
Behold  til efe  four,  who  ishe  that  fhall  fay.  They  have  finned  ?  or  unto  whom /hill  they  jj,g  ff.,,j^^ 
make  account  ?  Not  unto  you,  O  you  fons  of  men,  nor  unto  your  children  :  for  unto /v.  E-K.  I'.K. 
the  Lord  beloiigeth  the  judgement  of  his  fervants.  •  &  I  a. 

Now  therefore,  let  the  earth  give  forth  her  fruit  unto  you,  and  let  the  Mountains  forfake  \  blcfsin;? 
their  barrennefs  where  your  footjiep  JhaU  remain.  Happy  is  he  that  falutetb  you,  and  cur  fed  is  he  foro;;:dience 
that  holdith  up  hit  hands  againil  you.    And  power  Ihall  be  given  unto  you  from  .henceforth  a' cording 
to  relifl-  your  enemies  :  and  the  Lord  (hall  ahvayes  hear  you  in  the  time  of  your  troubles.  ^'^  laicn.^ 
And  I  atKletit  unto  you  to  play  the  harlot  with  you,  and  am  to  enrich  y»u  with  the  f^oils  of  other  v>reparare 
men,     Frefare  for  me^  for  I  come  portly.     Provide  ymr  Chambers  for  me^,  that  tihey.fnay  be  ''nosnntde- 
fweet  And  cleanly  ;  for  I  will  tmkf  A  dwelling-place  amongH  you  »and  I  will  be  common  with  Iffnra. 
the  father  and  the  [on,  yea  and  with  all  them  that  truly  fuvourethyeu  :  for  nty  youth  is  in  her  S'^l'-itat'.o 
flowers^  and  my  jireagth  it  not  to  be  extinguijhed  with  man.     Strong  am  I  abnve  and  belm,there-.  prima, 
fore  provide  for  me  :  for  behold,  I  now  falute  you,  and  let  peace  be  amongff  yon  ;  for  I  am  the 
Daughter  of  Comfort.     Difclofe  not  my  fecrets  unto  women,  neither  let  themunderjtand  Secrecy  from 
how  f»eet  1  ar»,  for  all  thirds  belongethnot  to  every  one.    I  come  unto  you  again^  v;omen^ 

E.  K.  She  is  gone  along  that  green  fieJd  alfo. 

^o  I  read  it  over  to  our  great  comfort. 

A.  We  nio:ft  humbly  and  heartily  thank  thee,  O  God  Almighty,  the  onely  fountain 
of  WifdGme,^owcr,  and  all  goodnefs :  Help  us  now  and  ever  to  be  faithful  and  fruitful 
fervams  to  thee^  for  thy  honour  and  glory.     Amen. 

E.K.   The  field  appeareth  a  very  level  ground,covered  with  pretty 

grafs  even  to  the  brinks  of  the It  is  bright  if  the  Sun  light, 

but  i  Tee  not  the  Sun,  but  the  clear-  sky  over  it. 

c^.  Vanfa  ftmihora  univs. 

E,K.  Now  cometh  the  horfeman,  and  rideth  by  into  i^&  field,  and 
fo  doth  Madimi.  Now  cometh  the  third,  and  To  goeth  away  into 
the  field. 

Now  cometh  Die  that  was  left  here  ;  flie  ftandeth  flill :  fhe  hath  ^^^f^"^  - 
a  book  in  her  hand  covered;  (as  it  were)  with  Mofs  three  inches  at  the 
head;,  and  four  inches  longs,  and  a  finger  thick  :  it  hath  no  Clafps  i 
jtis  plain. 

Pitufa. 
7  be  fourth  hoirr  after  dinner,  repair  hither  again:  And  whttfoever  ycu- fhtW  feade-out  of 
this  book,  receive  it  kjteeling  upon  ymr  kftees  j  and  fee  that  you  fufftr  no  Creature  female  ^"^'7  ^^^ 
to  enter  within  this  place  :  Neither  Jhall  the  things  that  he  opened  unto  you^  be  revealed  un-  ^'*'  ■"  " 
Ko  your  wives,  or  unto  any  Creatureas  yet :  for  I  will  lye  with  you,  a  while ^- and.  yg\{  IhtU 
f  rceiv^e  ^at  I  amfwett  and  full  of  Comfort,  and  that  the  Lord  is  at  hand,  and  that  he  mil 
fcortiy  vikt  the  earth,  and  all  his  whole  Provinces.  ^  . 

D  d  a  E,K, 


2  6         A  true  ^Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABions^  mth  Spirits, dec. 


X)om:riHi 

propf  ejl- 


E.  K.   She  turneth  her  felf  into  a  thoufand  /liapes  of  all  Creatures : 
and  now  fhe  is  come  to  her  own  form  again. 
She  hangcth  the  Book  in  the  air. 
Give  God  thanks,  and  fo  depart. 

A.  All  laudj  thanks,  honour  and  gloiy  be  to  oui-  God,  our  King  and  Saviour,  now 
«nd  ever.     Amen. 


1587. 


Saturday  the  fame  day. 


AFter  Dinner,  about  four  hours,  or  fomewhat  lefs  we  reforted  to  the  place. 
A  voyce  to  E.K.  Kneel  towardthe  Eart  ;  fo  he  kneeled  at  the  table  of  Covenant, 
with  his  face  toward  the  Eaft;  and  I  at  my  table  oppofite  to  him. 

A In  the  Name  of  God  the  Father ,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  HoiyGhoft. . 

A»ten. 

Re&efapere  &  inteUegere  doceto  nos  ( 0  Vominiu)  nam  fapentia  tua^totum  efl  quod  qu£rmnf 
Da  verbuin  tuum  inorem\\ro  &  fafknxtimxuam  in  cordibus  nojiritfige. 

E.  K.  The  Book  remaineth  hanging  in  the  ayre. 

A  voice Kelly,  I  know  it  is  troublefome  for  thee  to  kneel  :  Sit.        Fiufa  magna. 

A  , So  E.K.  rofe  from  kneeling,  and  did  fit. 

E.  K.  Now  flie  is  here,  that  laft  advertifed  us. 

She  taketh  the  book  and  dividcth  it  into  two  parts :  and  it  feem- 
eth  to  be  two  books  :  the  half  cover  adjoyning  to  one,  and  the 
div^ed!  other  half  cover  bel6nging  to  the  other,  the  fides  with  the  covers-are 
towards  me. 

......  JFifdome  if  a  piercing  beam,  vehich  it  the  center  of  the  fpiritual  being  of  the  holy 

Spirit,  touching  from  all  parts  from  whence  the  Divinity  fendeth  it  out  :  and  is  proper  to 
the  foul,  or  unto  fubjUnces ,  that  have  beginning,but  no  ending  ;  fothat,  whatfoever  (hall  have 
end,  can  never  attain  unto  that  which  it  called.  iVifdome  :  Neither  can  things  that  are  fuhjedta 
the  fecond  death,  receive  any  fuch  influence ,  becaufe  they  are  already  noted  ,  and  marine d  with 
the  feat  of  dejlruClion.  Happy  ii  he  whom  God  hath  made  a  vejfel  of  falvation  ;  for  unto  him  be- 
Ad  imit^t-  ioHgetb  ioy,  and  a  crown  of  reward  :  Adam  (your  forefather  and  firft  parent)  inrefpe&of  hit 
»iemDei"  creation,  that isto  fay,  inrefpeB  of  his  imaginative compofition  received  no pength,  but  by  the 
failaserat'  Holy  GhoH-^for  the  foul  of  man  is  free  from  allpafjions  and  affeCiiom,  until  it  enter  into  the  body 
unto  the  which  it  is  limited  :  fo  that,  being  neither  good  nor  bad  (but  apt  unto  both)  he  is  left^ 
iy  Divine  providence  and  permijjion  joyned  together  to  the  end  of  the  one,  or  the  other:  But 
•fpherefoever  wifdome  dweHeth,  it  dwelleth  not  with  the  foul ,  oi  any  property  thereof,  hut  according 
to  the  good  will  of  God,  whofe  mercy  concurreth  on  every  fide  into  him  ,  and  takfth  up  a  manfion 
therein;  to  utter  out,  and  manifeji  his  great  goodnefs  :  And  even  oi  the  heavens  are  glorified  con- 
tinually with  the  Spirit  of  God  :  So  is  the  ful  of  man  glorified,  that  receiveth  fandificatiott 
thereby;  for  no  man  is  illuminated,  that  is  not  fandified  :  neither  it  there  any  man  perfedly  fan- 
Hi  fied,  that  is  not  illuminated.  I  fpeak^  this  (my  brethren)  for  that  youjhaU  7«;- 
derfiand,that  no  man  did,  or  can  ever  attainto  wifdom  (  that  per  felf  wifdome  which  I  jpeal^ 


The 'con- 
ceiving the 
expofuion 
of  our  for- 
mer books. 
The  good 
will  of  God. 
Adam  his 
knowledge. 

The  Apo- 
Ifles. 
We. 


of)  without  he  become  a  Center  in  his  foul  unto  the  mercies,  and  good  will  of  God  comprehend- 
ing him  ,  and  dwelling  in  him  ,  therefore  lift  up  your  eyes  and  fee.  Call  your  wits  together  ,  and 
mark^my  words.  To  teach  you,  or  expound  unto  youthe  my^eries  of  the  Bookj  thatyou  have  al- 
ready received  ,  if  not  in  my  power  ,  but  in  the  good  will  of  God,  after  whofe  Image  I  am  : 
Which  goodwill  of  God,  is  the  defcending  of  his  holy  Spirit  abundantly  upon  you, 
and  into  you,  opening  all  your  fenfes ,  and  niakjng  you  perfeS  men:  for  Adam  under  flood  by 
that  grace,  and  his  eyes  were  opened  fo  that  he  faw  and  l{new  all  things  that  were 
to  his  underflanding  :  So  have  all  thofc  more  and  lefs,  that  have  been  counted  wife,  received  the 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Choft  ,  which  fetteth  the  foul  on  man  fo  on  fire  that  he  pierceth  into  all 
things,  and  judgeth  mightily.  The  ApolHes  which  knew  even  the  thoughts  of  men, 
underrtood  all  things  ,  becaufe  the  holy  Spirit>made  a  dwelling  place  in  them  :  even  fo 
fliall  it  happen  unto  you  :  Foryou  are  the  chofen  of  this  laft  dayes,  andfuch  aslhall  be 
full  of  the  blejjings  of  Cod,  and  hit  Spirit  fliall  refl  with  ym  abundantly.  Mark^therefore  what 
I  have  to  fay  umo you. 


T 


0 


A  true  delation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JHions,  mth  Spirits^dcc.  ^  zy 


■  A  hundred  dayes  are  limited  unto  you  during  the  which  time  ,  you  (hall  every  feventh,  pre- 
feiit  your  felvcs  in  this  place,  anJ  you  fhalllaud  and  praifeGod.     And  behold  I  will  be  ^"  hundred 
jtrefent  amotigfiyou.  ''^i«  limited 

•  And  before  thefe  dayes  faf>,  when  power  if  given  me  fo  to  do,  I  will  enter  out  of  this  Stone  un-   ^^'''^  ^"^ 
uyoii  andyou  fliall  eat  up  thefe  two  bookj,  both  the  one  and  the  other  :   and  wif-  nZf^  ,i 

dame  pall  be  divided  betwcenyou,  fi/fficient  to  each  man.  apparition. 

ihenjhallyour  eyes  be  opened  to  fee  and  underftand  all  fucli  things  as  have  been  written  un-  The  undcr- 
to  you,  and  taught  you  from  above.  But  beware  ye  tul^eheed,  that  you  dwell  within  your  Handing  of 
felves,  and  keep  the  fecrets  of  God,  untill  the  time  come  that  youfhall  be  bid  SPEAK  :  fucluhiiiRS 
for  th;H  lljall  the  Spirit  of  God  be  mighty  uponyou;  fo  that  it  pall  be  faid  of  you,  LO  were  as  have  bc- 
nor  thde,  the  Sorcerers  ,  and  fuch  as  wei  e  accounted  Vagabonds  ;  Other  fome pall  fay,  |oic  time 
Behold  let  us  take  heed  J  and  let  us  humble  ourfelves  before  them  :  for  the  Lord  oi" '^^'^^ '''^'i* 
Hoalls  is  with  them.  ™  "=>  '"y 

And  you  (hall  have  power  in  the  Heavens,  and  in  the  lower  bodies  :  And  it  pall  be  j;|ij^j1' 
taught  you  at  all  times  inwardly,f^'^M  what  belongeth  to  the  hearts  of  men  :  T'henpjt  thou  [„^t,ii 
E.'K.  have  a  new  coat  put  on  thee  ,  <r«i /t /?;^// be  all  of  one  colour.     Then palt  thou  a.  ''1^  Power  to  be 
have  power  to  open  that  book  ,  which  God  hath  committed  unto  thee  i  but  ufe  your  felves  given  us. 
4K  men,  yea  evin  thenreynember  fuch  as  may  receive  the  mercies  and  grace  of  God  :  And  let  all  VtaeaElio- 
peace  and  unity  be  amongft  you:  For  even  as  the  Sun  lookfth  into  all  things  from  above,{o  (hall  new  d».i583 
you  into  all  the  creatures  that  live  upon  the  earthyw  the  one  ofyoupall  have  his  menfis  die., 

lifted,  and  pall  enter  into  the  fnirth  or  fifth  heaven,  for  unto  him  that  if  w>orW/y  °f  his  divers 
kjiowledge  be  given;  and  unto  him  that  hath  been  patient ,  pall  greater  things  defcend.  Not-  ipoctedcoat. 
withjianding  both  fufficiently  fati)fied:In  the  meanfeafon,Thc  feventh  day  hencc,pahhou  hving  ^°^'^  ^"a 
in  fuch  things,  as  the  Lord  hath  given  thee  :  And  in  this  place  they  (hall  be  difpofed  ac-  £('^™^g'^'  _ 
cording  to  the  knowledge  that  is  given  me  :  And  herein  thou  haji  ^leafed  the  Lord;  ^<'*"  the  4th.  and 
that  thou  haft  dealed  ftreight,  and  according  to  brotherly  meaning.  5th.heavea. 

A-  Now  Cometh  the  time  that  the  Whorepallbe  called  before  the  Higheji,and  the  tenth  Month  a  OLord  I 
hence,  pall  the  Turk  and  the  Mofcovite  make  a  perpetual  league  together,  and  in  the  thirteenth  thank  thee 
month,  (l>all  Poland  be  affaulted  ,  with  theTartarians,  and  pall  be  fpoyled  :  yea  even  unto  that  thou 
the  very  ribs,fo  that  in  the  fxtecnth  month  they  (hall  fall  all  together  from  Chrift  :  And  the  haiiacccptcd 
hand  of  God  (hall  run  in  vengeance  ,  vengeance,  even  through  this  Kingdome,  and  through  my  patience. 
Germ:n\y,and  into  Italy ;  and  in  the  23.  Month  Kome  pall  be  deftroyed  ,  fo  that  onejione  pall  ^J.f^^"  i°- 
Kot  be  left  jianding  upon  another,  and  vengeance  (hall   be  on  all  the  earth,  and  fear  upon  ^f  £,T°1*!» 
dlpeople,for  the  Lord  ii  gone  out  againif  them  :  They  eat  and  drink,   and  fay,  Let  us  be  ^^^^  ^  ^j^  J  * 
merry :  tf^o  be  v.nto  them,  for  the  kjiownot  the  time  of  their  vifitation.     For  lo  Jujiice  palt  vifit  powder. 
them  and  tread  them  under  foot  :  And  even  this  Kingdome  pall  dure  for  a  while  5  that  is  to  fay,         ^ 
This  wickfdtriumph.  And  behold  in  the  North  pall  rife  that  Monjler  ,  and  pall  pafs  forth  with  Menfeio. 
many  Miracles,  but  yon  feeing  all  thefe  things  (JmU  be  at  quietnefs  untill  fuch  times  as  it   (hall  forte  menfe 
be  (aid  unto  them,  Revenge.     Happy  is  he  that  is  not  partakjr  of  the  love  of  fuch  tK pall  be  pro  ann.erit. 
vexed  theje  latter  dayes.  AProphcfis 

E.  K.  She  is  gone.  PoSd^* 

A.  I  read  thefe  over  to  E.  K.    To  his  great  comfort.  Mcfife  16, 

■  ......  Maks  "'^^fd.,  I  have  m  more  to  fay  •  Bohemia. 

Gcrmania. 

£,.I>eonojlroOmnipotentj,  yatri,Filio,  &  Spiritui  fanHofitomnis  laufgratiarum  adiOp    honor  Italia. 

gloria  &  Imperium  nunc  &  in  fempiterna.  fjeculorum  fecuU.     Amen.  ^^■.'5^9' 

Antichrtfiiu 

Untill. 

Revenge. 


D  eld  7  Magnifid 


*zS        A  true  %elatwn  o/'  Dr.  D ee  his  JBiom,  mth  Spirits,  6c c. 


I 


MAgnificiviri  fr aires  ^  AtnictChariJJ'.  Hodiehora  9.  ante  meridiem  ijia 
mihiaUatif.  funt  liters  a  Domino  Schombergio,  qn£  datte  funt  5  Mar- 
cii,  &  debebat  jamdevcniffein  manus  meas  antea.  Ex  qttibus  intelligo  ip- 
fum  dim  Domino  Holek  expert  are  rejponfnm  Munfterbergii.  ^andoquidem 
Omnipotens  ille  omnium  rerum  moderator^  (^  reUor  vos  delegaverit  ad  hoc  mi" 
tiijicrium  ^  opus  perficiendum.  Ego  nihil  fcio  quid  agendum^  nee  nllttmmeum 
eonjilium  eo  accedere  poteji^  i{t  dil^onere  aliquid pojjim^  fciam  aut  "velim^,  nifi 
quod  fapientijfimo  iUi  moderatori  vifnm  ftierit.  Proinde  omnia  vobis  tranf- 
mitto^  Orate  fedulo^  &  quod  placuerit  JltiJJimo  e^  Potntijjimo  Domino  hoc 
fiat^  &  me  ctiam  in  omnibus  informate  e^  in  tantis  libenter  ohedire  cupio  ^ 
volo  :  Etitanolimneq--,  diem  ijiam  pratermittere  quin  jiatim  rnrfus  ad  vos 
tranfmittam.  Interim  vos  ^  meipfum  Dei  omnipotentk  bonitati  immenf^que 
mifericordi£  commendans.     Dat.  Cromovis,  i6Marciij  Aitno  1587. 

Fejier  amicus  ^  frater^ 
Cuilielmus  manu  propria. 

Magnificis  viris  Domino  Joanni  Dee  &  Domino  Edvardo  KeUeo  &ad 
manus  proprias. 

1587.     Recepimus  tandem  Trebons  Aprilk  2.  l<ios  enim  a  Reichftenio  ahi^ 
veramus  ^  rediveratnus  anteqnam  <r<^Reichftenium  nunciusvenit. 


MAgnifici  Domini  Chariffimi  amici  &  fratres,  ad  literasveftras  nihil  re-  J 
fpondere  potui,  quandoquidem  per  fuas  mihi  literas  D.  Schomberg^  * 
de  fuo  &  focii  ipfius  a  .  .  .  .  tu  fignificaveras,  Toluiprimum  qux  mihi .... 
necentur  audire.  Et  fi  aliqua  nova  effent  vel  non  audita,  dominationem 
veftram  magnificam  denuo  certiorem  reddere.  Haeri  noftu  folus  ad  me  ve- 
nit  D.  a  Schomberg.  relifto  focio  in  monafterio  meo.  Coronienli  dimidium 
ab  hinc  milliare,  &  denegotiis  mihimulta  expofuir,  dequibus  uci  intellexi, 
cxipfo&  Rom.  veftris  Mag.  fignificaverit,  Uti  potui  intelligcre,  fatis  cir- 
cumfpefte  8c  provide  ncgotia  funt  tradtata  ufq^  hue,  &  fpero  etiam  fideli- 
ter  ;  Ad  omnia  ifta  refpondi,  prout  fepiffime  a  me  intellexiftis,  Scnuper  e- 
tiam  literis  quae  illi  dicenda  putabam  Dom.  veftrs  fcripfi.  Tota  res  vide- 
tur  conlifterc  in  adjuvandis  aliquibus  perfonis  pecuniarum  aliquo  auxilio, 
&  prout  6c  fcriptum  five  ....  memoriale  mihi  tradidit,  quod  tranfmitto 
Dom.  veftris  perlcgendum  8c  confiderandum,  8c  poft,mihi  remittatur  oro. 
Chariffimi  Domini  fcitis  quse  fit  vohmtas  Domini,  proxima  a&io  O'  ali<e, 
(mihi  videtur)  annuunt  ipfosadjutandos,  fiat  fecundum  ipfius  cujus  omnia 
lunt  voluntate  8c  inifericordiffima  difpofitione  8c  expediantur  eo  celerius, 
prout  cum  Domino  ££/z)4r(^(?  locuti  fumus.  Ipfi  refpondeant  Domino  altif- 
fimo8c  potcntiffimo  defide  quam  ipfi  prsftabunt,  fin  vero  alitervifumfue- 
rit  Omnipotenti  Domino  fiat  ita.  Rogo  Dom.  veftras  Magn.  quam  amantif- 
fime  piis  fuis  ad  Deum  orationibus  8c  mediis  a  Domino  vobis  traditis  8c  con- 
ceffis  promovete,  8c  adjuvetis  Domini  Dei  noftri  opus  8c  voluntatem  ex- 
cqui.  ^^ 

Socius  remanfit  inmonafterio,  ut  fupra  didlum,  8c  conclufi  cum  Domino  ^^^R 
Schombergio^  ut  neqj  videam  neq;  traftem  cum  illo,  certis  de  caufis,  quaaJ^Hl 
vobis  fignificabit,  8c  a  me  etiam  intelligetis  ;  tamenut  eo  fit  melius  conten-  "^^ 
tus  de  duobus  vel  tribus  millibus  tallerorum  ipfi  procurabitur  ad  qu»dam  fi- 
bi  neccflfaria  comparanda  in  lucio  fperat  ipfum  bene  fore  contentum  pro 
tempore  raodo  cstera  qu^  majora  funt  propter  reliqua  ut  fupra  fcripfi  pro- 
curentur. 

Ego 


A  true  "Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  AUions^i^hh  Sfirits^dcc,        *  ip 


Ego  nonfum  ab  Iniperatore  vocatus,  fedmeam  dealiquibusexpetivit  fua 
Majcftas  fententiam  cle  quibus  refcripli  ut  decuit. 

DeactioneintcllexiDom.  veftrasparatas  ad  prsfcriptum  diemeffe  velle, 
bene  eft.  Semper  nos  paratoseflcdecet  &convenit  ,  Ipfe  benigniffime  quse 
in  nobis  dcfunt,  fua  mifericordia  8c  dementia  incnarrabili  perficiat  ;  Placet 
jnihi  fententia  Dom.  veftrarum  8c  qux  initio  8c  in  prooemio  adionis  propo- 
iierevelletis,  deque  me  informabitis,  ad  hoc  me  componam  &  expeftabo 
humiliter  refponfum. 

^te  fropoficfida  put  aba  fu  Jtitllafunt  alia  ni^iilla. 

1.  Si  Imperatoxde rebus  Tolonick  a  mcquicquid  fcifcitari  vellet,  aut  fu- 
fpicionealiqua  de  me  concepta  aut  fingendo  libi  aliquid  ^uomodo  me  gerere 
debeam. 

2.  Si  Imperatorde  fucceflioneRegnihujus  pro  fratre  aliquid  traftare  vel- 
let quomodomegerere  debeam. 

3.  Si  eleftio  Polo?iica  fucceffura  (it,  quid  de  bonis  meis  paternis  difponat 
Dominus,  Sc  mihi  quid  faciendum. 

4.  Debeo-nede  negotioP<7/<;«7coaliquacumEled:ore  JSr^wt/ewiKy^iro  aut 
aliquo  Principe  Imperii  confidenter  conferre,  velnon.  Cum  quibus,  quan- 
do8c  quaratione. 

5.  Similes  aliquisconducendus8cquando. 

6.  Si  Pontifex  aut  Imperator  de  perfonis  Dom.  veftrarum  vellet  aliquid 
attentare,  vel  eas  iterum  re/e^tfrejVelquovismodo  perturbare,  quid  agendum 
8c  ipfis  refpondendum. 

7.  Si  de  Thefauro  nobk  concredito  aliquid  Caefari  fit  communicandum, 
quando,  quantum,  Sc  quomodo. 

8.  Si  Imperator  mea  opera  uti  vellet  proagendis  Comitiis  in  JUoravia  & 
Silejiay  fi  hoc  fufciperemunus  debeam. 

L'ecseteri  humiliter  fupplicentut  meita  difponeredignetur  altiffimus  ut 
fibi  foli  placeara  8c  ferviam  fideliter  &  conftanter  ad  fui  nominis  xternam  glo- 
riam  Sc  ReipubliccE  Chriftianx  falutem. 

Si  Dom.  veftrx  putant  aliqua  omittcnda,  aut  quae  ofFendere  pofTentper 
amoremDeiorOj  bene  confiderent :  omittant  aut  emendant  pro  fua  piecate 
8c  prudentia. 

Unuu^  eft  quod  omifi  de  propofitionibus ;  Quod  conftitueram  in  animo  de 
Thefauro  Domini  mihi  benigne  conceffo  aliquas  fundationes,  hie  in  pa* 
tria  ifta  conftituere.  Deus  fcit  mentem  meam  quern nihillatet.  Si  placet 
hoc  meum  mifericordiflimo  Domino  propofitum  vel  non. 

Et  pr^fertim  fi  mihi  alio  (divina  ita  difponente  gratia)  fitcommi^randum, 
vellem  patria  mea  cognofcat,  8c  tota  pofteritas  quod  amaverim  illam,  8c 
optime  de  falute  ip forum  8c  pofteritatis  fenferim. 

Dat.  Cromovi£  fsria  5 .  poft  Pafcha,  Anno  1 587. 

Vejier  ex  animo,  &  f rater  ^  amicm 
^mceruf 

Cuilielmus  manu  propria. 


In 


^ 


^o  '        Jitrue  ^B^lation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  ABionSy  with  SpiritSydcc. 


In  nomine  Patiis,  &:  Filii,  Sc  Spiritus  Sandi.       Ameji. 

Gloria  Patri,  &  Filii,  &  Spiritui  San£lo  :   ficut  crat  in  principio  Sc 
nunc  Scfemper  &:  in  feciila  fcculorum.     Amen. 

In  JBione  Tertian  ^roponenda, 

I .  T~^£tf  OMnJpotenti^  Tatrj^  Filio  ^  Spiritui  SanUo^  offerimm  nos  humili- 
'  \_^  mi^pariitos ad,  Divina.  Oracnla^  tnonitti^  injirudfiones^  informattonesy 
^  alia  qu£cunq'-y  in  hac  generali  Aifione^  Jufcipienda,  intelligcnda^  e^  exe- 
quenda,  qu£  J'ua  Diviria  Majejioi^  pro  fua.  gloria  &  nojira  confolationc 
maxitna  fore,  pr<eviderit  C^  decreverit. 

2.  Huf/uliter  requirimus,  art  hie plenariah^c  tran^tgetur  A&io  :  velannO' 
bis  ad  Cromoviaiiij  cum  necejjarik  nojirjs  rebus  ^  (^  quibus  ill  is  quidem^  pro- 
peranditm  fuerit. 

5.  Has  noji'ri  Domini  Rofenbergii  Hu^fiiones  12  generates,  d^  alia  qua- 
cnnq'-^in  eijdem particulariter continentHr,  htimiliter  off erimuj, tarn  ejus  qiiam 
iioflro  7iomine,  ilia  d^  talia  expeH antes  rej^onfa  qu£  (j^  qualia  a  fede  Maje- 
ftatk  Divin<€,  in  fuorum  fervorum  confnUationibus  procedere,  ^  olim  ^ 
femper  folent.; 

.  4.  Et  quia  in  eifdem  ^acjiionibus,  nulla  faUa  ejl  mentio  de  ufn  pulverk 
que»/  jibi  divinituf  conce/jum  habet^C^  aliquotiesprius  diclum  fuerit,  quod  in 
hac  A0ione,  informaretur  deillim  pulvcrk  ufu^nos,  jam  humiliter  ill  am  de~ 
jideramm  informationem. 

'  S*  Et  f 'iW  ioctraordinarius  ijle  vehemens  favor  Atofchovitici  Trincipk  erga 
jneincognttum  jam  eft  mihi  (^  multis  alik  conteJiat/0,  d^  manifejius,  (ago 
Geo  Optimo  Maximo  gratiof  quantas  pojjum  maxitnas)  d^  quia  incertus  fum 
ad  quern  finem  Deui  ilium  ejus  favor  em  erga  me,  dirigere  veiit  :  humiliter  peto 
C^  mihi  a  te  (Omnipotens  DeusJ  informatio  detur  de  ijio  fine,  d"  voluntate 
tttain  hac  parte,  C^  quo  modo  ejufUem  Nuncifs  reffondere  debeam,  ft  qui  jaf» 
venerint  de  c£ter<) . 

6,  An  non  debeamus  nofmet  dijponere,  (nt  alias,  aliquoties  prdtmonitum  eji^ 
■tit  hic,  lapidem  Phlofophorum  ex  methodo  Dunftani  conficiamus  :  qu£  me- 
thodur,  quia  mihi  non  conjiat,  f^peme  haUenus  fecit  videri  quaft  in  hoc  labors 
•tardum,otiofum,  vel  ignavum  :  Vbi,  contra,,  quam  ejl  paratus  animus  meus 
d^  manus  d>"  pedes  d^  omnes  vires  tarn  animi  quam  corporis  mei,  Tu  nojii,  Tuq^ 
j(:0  Dcuf)  'tejifs  ejio  meus. 

-.'■  7.  ilia  Praxis,  cum  poculo  ferreo,  canali  vitrea,^calce  d^c.  nondum  nobig 
fuccedit'-)  idcirco,  ad  illius  quoq\  Conclujlonis  veritatem  praBicam  obtinen- 
dam,  libenter  fciremus,  quid  eji  quod  nos  ha&enus  impedivit,  vel  quid  nobk 
dceji,  adveram  intelligendam,  d^  perficicndam  praxim  til  am. 

y.  Thomx  Y%.c\\t\decumbentis  valetudinem  d^  fanitatem,  tibi  (O  Deus) 
commendamus,  d^  fupplicamus ,  nt  illi,  nobijque  propitius  ejjf'e  velis  :  il~ 
lufaq'-ftfahnm  dt  falvum  nobis  reddcre  d^  con  fir  mare  digneris  adnominis  tui 
laudcm,  honorem  d^  gloriam^  ex  fideli  ejufdem  pojihac  jervitio,  d^  officio  : 
erga  divinam  tuam  Majefiatem.     ATncn. 

9,:Jpa9na,  uxor  Ed:  Kellei  nj^flri^  Omnipotenti  Divin<e  Majejiati  tus 
fupplicatpcrme,  d^  ego  humiUm'e  (ejufdem  ]o:\.i-\n£  nomine)  tibi  (o  Deus) 
fupplico,  nt  illi  velis  ejje  mifericors,  clemens  d>"  bemgnus'^  d^  itt  ejus  multi- 
plices  ad  te  preces pro  ftecunditate  cum  hoc  ejus  marito  obtmenda,  paterna  re- 
Jpicias  charitate  :  d^  ut  illi  hoc  contnbuere  velis  gaudium,  d^  cpi.tfi  jui  fide- 
lis  fervitii  (erga  hunc  fuum  maritum)  premium,  ut  prole  per  cundem  d^ 
^cHm  eodem  gaudere  pojjit  beata  :  rejpice  qu^Jumus  banc  nojiram  pttitionem, 
nt  a  htnltis  dim  pits  ftemtnis  c^   viris   eandem   accepjjii,  d^  etiam  concef- 

m 


I     — : ^___ 

J  true  "Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  hU  Mions,  mth  Spirtts^^c. 


^-  ^j 


ftjii  petiti(Pnem  Mifericordijfime  Pater,  per  Filium  tuum,  Dominum   fiofintnt 
jefiim  Chrifliim.     A  men . 

lO.  rfOv/ea]an3.  (o  Dens')  hnmilime  gratias  ago,  qtiod  ha&cnus  t^m  cle- 
menier  €^  pie  illam  liberaverk  a  fita;  radicalis  infirmitatis  contagione  c 
contra  quam  &  medicinam  facere,  me  docn/Jii  :  &  nte  ut  faceremadjuvijii, 
faciteque  earn  virtHtem  concejjijiz,  ut  ilia  remedii  optati  nohk  pr^eberet  figna^ 
qualianojira  imperitia  magis  J^erat  ej'e  bona  d^  certa  _,  quam  reBa  ratiene 
dijitdicarepoteji,  hoc  igitur  fymptona  egefiionis  fanguinolentx  quid  fit  ne- 
fcimns,  an  morbi  alterius  indicium,  an  di6f£  Medicine  adhitc  in  fna  vir- 
tnte  ^  efficacia  procedentis,  operatic.  Tuuw  (O  Deits)  ne  dedigneris  impar- 
tiremiht  confilium  :  ^  de  jfuxn  illo  freqtienti,  ex  ejufdem  Janx  anribhs,  li- 
benter  audire  vellemut  remedium  aliquod. 

De  AnglisE    &  Regina  ejufdem  Jiatu^  Ji  aliqnid  fcire  nobk   expedit,  li- 
benter  andiemus. 


^  3  ^        A  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JHwm,  mth  Spirits,  dec. 


^^■>^^4?^^^^'^^^^^-'^^^^^^^^^4f^4?^4p4?^^^^^^^^^^^4?^^^^^^^^^^^^ 


London^  At  Mrs,  (joodman  her  houfe. 

Martii  20  a  merlde  hora  4.  \ 

JESUS 

OmnipQtens  fempiteriie  (3c  une  Deus. 

Mlnm  lucem  tuam  &  veritatem  Utam,  ut  if  fa.  me  ducat  &  prducat  ad  montem  fanSum 
tuum  &  Tabernacula.     Amen. 
......  I  am  blejfed  Raphael,  a  hlejfed  mejfenger  of  the  Almighty  ^1  gm  fent  of-  God  ,   -ffho  is 

hUffed  for  evermore.  Anicn. 

John  Dee,  /  am  fent  of  God  for  thy  comfort  fir  ft  to  certifie  thee  than  jhak  overcome  thU  thy 
infirmity  J  and  vhen  thou  art  ftrong  in  body,  as  God  in  hpt  goodnefs  will  Mtnk^e  thee  ,  THEN  thou 
{halt  have  all  made  known  unto  thee  of  fuch  things  being  not  come  to  pafs  as  have  been 
before  fpoken  of,  hecaufe  that  thoujheuldeji  ta}{e  comf«n  in  God^  that  thou  art  not  left  from  the 
comfort  of  Gods  bleffed  creatures.  Noyp  God  hath  fent  me  at  this  time  whereby  thoujhalt  be  fa~ 
tiified,  THAT  when  thy  hod,y  is  able  to  abide  the  time  of  my  fervice  from  God  to  be  de- 
livered unto  thee  by  me  il/jp^«e/  :  "Xhy  friend '^ohn^ontojsytt  liveth J  but  his  time  is  lively 
to  be  port, 

Ask^  at  y  our  will- 

A O  God,  I  am  beaten  into  a  great  attempt,  to  make  the  coanfel  privy,  of  my 

beggary,  and  to  offer  the  Earle  of  Salisbury*,  fuch  my  duties  as  I  may  perfeft  to  his  con- 
tents How  ftandeth  this  with  your  good  liking  ? 
A.  Spiritual, 
"ihou   (halt  have  friends  J  in  thy  fuit  3    and  thou  Jhalt  have  foes,  hut    through   Gods 
A.  Spiritual,  ^ 

mercies,  thy  friends  ,  pall  overcome  thy  foes  and  thoupalt  fee  hew  thafGod  in  his  goodnefs  will 
wor'k,  mightily  in  his  power  for  thee, 

troceedinthy  fuit  fojhortly  (K  thoucanfi  finde'thyhealth  inbody  able  :  And  for  thy  health  vfe 
thy  own  skill,  that  God  hath,  and  pall  guide  thee  withall  to  thy  good  and  perfeft  receiving 
of  thy  perfect  health. 

^ Of  the  blood,  not  coming  out  of  my  Fundament,  but  at  a  little,as  it  were 

a  p'n  hole  of  the  skin. 

Raph.  that  the  which  thou  hadft  nh  knowledge  to  help  thy  weakjtefs ,  God  tn  his  mercies  did 
fend  thee  therein  pre  fent  help,  the  which  bta  only  for  that  iffue  thou  couldeji  not  have  lived. 
And  for  the  Cure  and  thy  help,  the  fame  God  will  work,  with  thee  in  thy  heart  and  minde  fo,  that 
itfi/all  be  known  unto  no  man,  but  by  Gods  merciful  goodnefs  delivered  mto  thee,fuch  wayes  and 
means  as  (hall  be  thy  help,  and  refiore  thee  to  health  again.  This  God  of  his  mercy  hath  fent  me  to 
deliver  this  port  meffage,  hecaufe  of  thy  weakftefs.  Thou  art  not  ftrong  to  indure  them,  there- 
r.  -,  /"'■^  f"'^P  ^  Gods  goodnefs  to  let  youto  underjtand  that  after  the  tenth  day  of  April  ,  /  will  then 
LiOj  appear  again,  and  thoupalt  underfiand  much  more  what  Gods  will  and  his  pleafure  U  to  be  done 
in  Gods  fervices  ,  and  for  your  good,and  fofer  this  little  port  meffage,  1  have  declared  unto  you 
the  will  of  JefusChriff  .•  Andfo  for  this  time  ,  In  the  Name  of  the  moft  higheft  Creator 
and  maker  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  1  do  now  return  at  hit  will  and  commandement,  and  I  am 
ready  at  dl  rimes  when  he  pall  commani  m  to  appear  to  thy  comfort.  Hit  Name  he  praifed 
tvermore.  Amm^Amen. 

£>,  Amen. 


Friday 


A  true^'R^aUon  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Aciions^with  Sfirits-,Scc.        *  22 


Friday  24,  Mart  it  hora  p  \ 


LJt 


,Eus  in  adjutorium  fiolhum  intendas    V.  D.  R.R.  ...  Zebaith ihe  Omni- 

f potent  God  be  praifed  for  evermore,  hk  holy  Name  be  glorified.    Now  John  Dee  ,  I  Ra- 
phael am  n  w  come  at  Gods  pleafure^and  at  his  commandemcnt  to  fpeak^witht'.ee^and  mak^  kjtown 
vnto  thee  as  far  forth  as  in  my  power  lieth  to  fpeak^Godhathfent  me  to  declare  unto  thee.-  the  caufe 
of  thy  defire  now  at  this  time,  John  Dec,  as  thou  art  an  earthly  man  ,  if  thou  doji  defire  to  have 
help  from  God  of  fitcb  things  m  earthly  men  cann  t  he  without  while   they  have  time  here  in  thif 
mortal  life,  thou  defirejl  to  have  kjiowledge  as  concerning  things  hid ,   the  wHch  I  Raphael  have 
no  delight,  neither  pleafnre  infpeakjng  of  any  fuch  earthly  matter,   or  eanhly  cafes.     But  my  de- 
light is  in  the  Almighty,  and  in  his  wifdome.  But  notwithjianding  at  this  recjueji,  and  thy  inward 
defire  in  God  to  be  certified  of  this  treafure  ,  the  which  thefe  two  men  whom  thou  kjtoweji  do  fpeak 
of,thiy  ever  had  a  ttme  appointed  of  God  for  it,and  it  was  not  ufed  accordingly  as  they  fhould  have 
done.    Now  this  fecend  time-,  becaufeyou  have  a  defire  to  have  kelp  and  kjiowledge  at  the  hands  of 
the  Almighty,  I  Raphael  do  command  thee  and  thofe  men  whom  thou  kjiowejl,   that  they  fl: all  not 
intermeddh,or  to  takf  it  in  hand  before  the  tenth  day  o/Jamiary  be  paji,  f,r  if  they  do    they  (hall 
not  prevail,  for  that  is  a  time  that  God  hath  beji  appointed  for  the  faid  purpofe,  andf^r  the  quiet 
enjoying  of  it ;  fo  tv'nn  that  day  is  paii,  then  let  th-m  in  the  name  of  God  enter  into  that  wor'\ 
And  ifihey  will  be  fuch  men  <w  they  ought  for  to  be,  and  as  Gods  will  is  that  theyfliould  be,  to  dea] 
faithfully  and  truly  one  with  the  other  in  deed  and  in  word,  God  will  thenblefs  their  good  purpofe 
and  bring  it  to  their  head  wf  en  they  (liali  take  in  hand  to  open  the  earth,  God  -will  prefently  at  that 
in-tant  tbenfufer  their  good  purpofe  to  tal^e  effed  ,  and  the  matter  to  be  effeUed  and  had,  fo  that 
they  Jhall  not  be  put  of,  if  they  (hall  he  are  or  fee  any  thing  that  they  fl^all  difli^e ,  but  fafely  to 
Jiand  in  the  hof  e,and  craving  at  Gods  hand  to  have  that  good  help  to  be  a  warrant  between  them 
and  all  hurt  and  danger  -whatfcever  may  hehapfen,and  fo  overcome.    I  fay.  If  they  will  faithfully 
fray  unto  G  od  with  their  whole  truji  in  G  ed,   G  od  will  hlefs  their  good  fuccefs,  if  they  be  otherwife 
then  ji ^.ood  never  jlir,  and  their  good  fuccefs  will  be  againji  them.    So  I  Raphael  have  made 
kjiown  unto  thee  Gods  purpofe  in  thit  thy  requejl. 

f 
For  this  I  have  faid. 

John  Dee,  /Raphael,  did  make  kjiownunto  this  defire  of  that  fecret ,  and  that  great  gift 
that  gave  vnto  thee  in  fuch  order  and  manner  as  thou  kjiowefi:  where  thou  hidji  it ,  and  that  never 
as  yet  had\i  the  kjicwtedge  and  the  wifdome  that  God  will  give  thee  as  Concerning  that,  and 

tnany  mo  fuch  7<nto  thee  :    So  this  rare-gift  being  taken  away  from  thee  by  them 

thou  kjioweji,  by  taking  thy  key  ,  end  fo  taking  of  it  from  thy  keeping,  it  was  the  will  and  purpofe 
of  God,tJiat  I  Raphael  jhould  give  fuch  ..  .  that  thou  (fjouldefl  have  knowledge  ...  of  the  fame, 
ihoujhalt  takf  fuch  courfe  ....  thou  may  eft  obtain  it  again,  and  whenthou  haft  it,  thou  (halt 
pnit  into  the  fame  cheji  again  ,  and  commit  it  into  the-  cujhdy  and  keeping  of  thy  very  friend 
John  Pontoys  ,  and  he  jhall,and  will  deal  faithfully  and  friendly  with  thee  in  keeping  the  fame 
until  fuch  time  as  by  that  ...  the  which  thou  k^toweft  is  promifed  unto  thee  ,  that  thou  fh  alt  re- 
ceive the  perfeB  widerftanding  vf  the  hid  kjiowledge  and  fecrecie  of  God  that  is  not  as  yet  made 

k^own  unto  thee,   and as  hath  been  faid,  fofljalt  thou  have  fuch  wifdome  delivered  unto 

thee  by  me  Ra  phael  that  jhall  come  in  fuch  . . .  and  order  as  hath  been  late  made  known  unto  thee 
for  thy  good  in  fucb jhort  and  fpeedy  time  to  he  performed,  and  fo  thus  much  I  have  made  k*iown 
unto  thfe,  as  God  hath  in  jiore  for  thee  to  be  per  formed. thus  much  1  have  now  faid,and  given  thee 
cunning  to  keep  it  in  fuch  maner  as  hhave  fpok^n,  or  elfe  thou  wilt  be  difappointed  ofthat,and  . .  . 
it  will  hide  (uch  purpofe  as  God  will  have  come  to  pafs,fo  in  his  mighty  power  command  me  to  come. 
I  have  for  this  matter  fini(hed  ;  If  thou  have  any  thing  fpeedily,  ask^  in  ...  for  I  am  to  depart. 

John  Dee,  If  thou  wilt  have  all  thy  caufe  then  ... .  as  thou  muftjhew  unto  thy  likjng  and 
hers  what  thou  hall  drawn,and  crave  for  good  ajfijiance  it  ...  of  . ..  defiring  his  help,  and  .  . . 
unto  her  the  difeafe.  . .  .to  go  to  fuch  men  xhatfhoald  give  thee  further  inftruBion  thy  beft  as  I  have 

faid  to  fl.'ew  untn  her  that  thou  haft  done    and  he  will  ...   in  thy  cafe  unto 

and  Canterbury,  and  fo  the  faith  Jhall  triumph  injhort  time,  and  if  this  be 

^  Jnlii  9.   hora.  4.  a  meridie. 

.    A.  After  my  Prayers  for  a  qiurter  of  an  hour,  a  Voice  faid,  pvefimsnfier 

I  am  Raphael  whofe  voice  thou  doft  hear  :  Tomorrow  morning  tit  nine  of  the  clocks  God  Three  Kings 
will  fend  me  to  thy  fight.  in  Kings- 

A.  So  with  thanks  to  God  I  ended.  »    ftrecc. 

y  ■  E  c  c  Mittifs 


* 


7±  A  true  ^lation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  AUions^  with  Sfiriti^dac. 


Fr'd^y  ths  <^.  MhXM  lucem  tuam  &  vahatnn  xuaniyqua  nos  ducant  &  ferducant  ad  montent  fandiim 

io7.';/,V,       tuuni  6'  cxlejiiatutitabernacula.     Amen. 

hoi-.-.^,.  Barth.   As  for  you,  the  Creator  of  God  doth  appear. 

£^.  Benedicluf  qui  venitin  nomine  Domini  HaUeluia. 

,  . Bkf^td  be  God  the  father,  and  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  holy  Ghoj}.     AU  honour 

and  pffer  be  aferihed  unto  the  living  God  for  evermore.  _  Amen.       a.  Amen. 

John  Dee,  I  am  Raphael,  one  of  the  blejfed  and  ektt  Angels  of  the  Almighty;  and  at  hk 
will  and  hi^  gcod  pleafure,  he  hath  commanded  me  to  appear  here  at  this  time,  to  fet  forth  the  tfill 
and  plea f lire  of  the  Almighty  God. 

John  Dee,  my  meffage  that  I  have  at  this  time  to  deliver  unto  thee,  k  of  great  force,  m  that 
GoA  would  have  thee  t:j  do.  And  where,w  it  was  fiid  at  my  laji  appearing  at  this  beholder y  that 
I  would  appear  again,  and  now  it  hath  plea  fed  God  to  fend  me  to  perform  and  make  kjtown  ac- 
cordingto  that  which  wm  then  faid,  that  all  things  before  promifed  (hould  be  made  plainly 
known  what  Gods  will  is  to  be  done  in  all  that  hath  been  before  faid. 

Now  I  do  mak/  kjfown  unto  you  the  plain  meaning  and  underjianding  thereof. 

Firii  th  u  haii  been  promifed  the  fecret  kjiowledge  and  under  ^landing  of  the  Fhilofophers  Stone, 
of  the  Book  of  St.  Dimftans,  to  have  the  kjtowledgeof  them. 

It  is  ftnte  a  long  time,  as  thou  kjiowefi  to  mans  reafon,  and  to  the  mindc  of  man,  a.  few  years 
is  with  man  thought  to  be  big  ■■,  andnow  God  hath  been  thy  kseper,  and  wo;r  chiefiy  created  thee, 
and  hath  fuffcred  thee  to  have  time  to  live  unto  this  age  :  and  furthermore,  thou  doji  lik^  vnto  thy 
Nativity,  and  confidering  thy  great  age  that  the  conrfe  of  Nature  for  age,  if  lik^'ly,  by  thy  rea- 
fon, to  takf  place.  BUT  J  >hn  Dee,  thou  d  H  well  remember  unto  whom,in  the  holy  Scriptures, 
thatGodin  his  mercies  did  adde  and  put  to  fifteen  years  longer  than  the  time  was  fet  him  :  So 
think^not  but  God  in  his  7verci-^s  will  be  as  great  unto  thee.  And  now  to  come  to  the  matter  where- 
by to  let  thee  to  utiderjiand  why  thou  badd  not  thus  thi^fe  rare  gifts  and  promifes  performed  unto 
thee,  it  was  the  will  of  God  to  hjep  them  away..,  and  to  fuffer  the  heart  of  thy  fupreme  head  and 
governour,  '.nder  God,  to  behardmd  agaiajl  thef,  that  thou  art  no  better  account  made  of  unto 
him,  hut  to  he  fuch  an  one  that  doth  deal  with  Devils  and  by  S  or  eery. ,  as  you  commonly  term  them 
Witchcraft  :  and  who  dath,  and  who  haih  informed  him,  to  be  thus  evil  and  hardly  informed  a~ 
gain^  thee,  but  only  the  Devil,  mid  by  the  hatred  of  thy  fecret  enemy  whom  thou  kjioweji  (Salif- 
bury  I  mean"^  and  all  m:ilicf  and  emmies  that  he  can  by  hit  Devils,  Maferien,  Hermcloe,  the 
four  wicked  ones,the  which  are  uCCoun:ed  the  four  Rulers  of  the  Air,whofe  names  6f  OrieSjEgym, 
Paynini,  and  Mayrary  :  Ihey  he  the  Devils  that  he  dcth  deal  withall,  that  he  through  their  en- 
ticing and  hifj  he  ihinkfth'  to  be  pleafant  and  good  wifdom  that  he  receiveth  at  their  hands ;  That 
he  and  his  Devils  do  feek  thy  overthrow  in  all  good  things,  and  doth  and  (hall,  fo  far  forth 
as  God  will  fuffer  the-!",  fe\all  the  malice  and  hindrance  in  all  good  caufes  to  be  done  to  thy 
good.  Therefore  now  John  Dee  I  am  to  let  thee  to  underft and  plainly  what  Gods  will  and  his 
great  pirpofe  if  to  have  thee  to  do,  although  it  may  feem  hard  to  thy  good  likjng,  conftiering  as 
thou  doji  think,i  the  weak^ejj^of  thy  body,  and  courfe  of  age .-  yet  notwithjlanding,  that  fame  God 
that  hath  benthyfrotecor  and  keeper  until  this  prefent  time  of  years,  that  fame  merciful  God 
Jhall  keep  thee,  and  make  thee  able  to  perform  thinn^s  that  pall  be  made  kjtown  unto  thee  ;  for  God 
will  not  beliow  fuch  rare  gifts  as  I  have  before  faid,  amongst  thofe  which  be  unworthy  of  fuch  great 
blefffngs  from  the  Almighty.  For  God  will  not  bejlow  Pearls  amongH  thofe  that  will  not  believe  nor 
under jiand  that  God  hath  any  fuchhlefftngs  to  bejhw  upon  men  :  for  I  fay  vnto  thee,  John  Dee, 
that  if  God  ffjould  or  would  befiow  thofe  blejJiMgsuponthee,  even  at  this  pre fent,  or  at  any  time 
to  be  Ihortly  performed  and  delivered  unto  thee :  Then,  except  that  thou  fliouldH  make 
all  things  plainly  kjtown  of  Gods  fee  rets  delivered  unto  thee,  unto  thy  fupreme  head  under 
God  here  upon  earth,and  likewife  thy  enemy  to  be  partaker  in  thefefecrets  andgreat  gifts  ofGod,if 
thou  wouldU  not  perform  as  much  unto  them,as  God  (hould give  wifdom  unto  thee,there?n,thy  life 
would  and  Jhould,  by  the  envy  and  malice  of  thofe  wicked  ones,and  by  thy  great  enemy  thou  fhoiddff 
jpeedily  be  cut  off  from  this  life,  but  God  will  net  have  it  fo.  So  if  thou  wilt  do  as  G»d  (hall 
command  thee  by  this  meffage,  thou  fhalt  have  all  thc(e.meffages,  promifes  and  wifdom,  both  for 
t^r  Fhilofophers  Stone,  the  book  of  S.Dunftans,tie  fecret  wifdom  of  that  Jewel  that  was  de- 
livered, as  thou  knowefi,  in  what  maimer  it  is  plainly  kjtown  unto  thee. 

So  now  it  is  the  will  of  God  to  fuffer  thy  fupreme  Head  his  heart  to  be  hardned  againft 
thee;  and  likfwife  for  thy  great  enemy  for  his  wickfd  injirudions  againii  thee,God  doth  fuffer  it  fo 
to  be,  even  ,h  Pharaoh  his  heart  was  hardned  againii  the  children  of  God,  fo  jiandetk  the  mat- 
ter againji  thee  with  them.  If  is  the  will  of  God  fo  to  fuffer  it  to  their  great  account  that  they 
(hall  have  to  makf,  when  it  jhall pleafe  the  Almighty  that  that  time  (hall  be,  that  they  muHreiider 
unto  God  their  accounts.  Now  John  Dee  it  is  the  will  of  the  Almighty  to  fend  we  Raphael  te 
deliver  unto  thee  this  Mt^dge,  the  which  will  fcem  unto  thee  to  be  very  hard  :  ^^frf*  t/'OM 
art  the  fervant  of  God,  and  one  whom  God  doth  favour  and  love  (^although  the  world  by  wicked 
enemies  doth  hate  thee)  willingly  and  obediently  follow  that  courfe  the  which  God  in  hii  mer- 
cies at  this  time  Jhall  makf  kjtown  unto  thee. 

Thou 


A  true  "Eeiatmi  0/  Dr.  Dee  his  Mtons,  mth  Sptrtts,i^c,  ^f,  ^5 

Thoirihak  (if  t'liolivvi'lc  obey  the  comnumdment  of  God,bv  me  made  know ntimo  thee) 
take  a  long  journey  in  hand,  and  go  where  thou  (halt  have  all  rhefe  s;rea;  mercies  of  God 
performed  untotlice,  and  God  will  jheyp  thecM  great  favour  tn  the  fight  of  God,  m  ever  he  did 
Jhev  unto  jo[\:^h,whowjif  Id  into  bondage.as  thou  knoweji,  and  in  allh^iwfnfmment  and  trou- 
bles G  d  was  with  him,and  delivered  him  .-  So,if_thou  wilt  follow  tha  commandment  from  God  de- 
livered mto  thee  ly  we  Raphael,r/;rft  thou  Jhalt  not,  doubt, nor  waver  in  thj  mind^hut  Cod  will  be 
mercifnl  unto  thee^bah  in  this  life  and  in  the  life  to  come ;  and  think^God  wiu  not  command  thee  t j 
takffuch  ajournyin  hand,  but  that  he  doth  know  that  if  beji  for  tkee,  and  he  vi'iW  preferve  thee, 
Jiftdkeep  tlieeinihyjourny.^«i/  thou  (huh  find  inthyjourny,  that  God  fhall  and  will  deal  wer- 
cifuliy  wi.h  thee  mfind.')t^  caCco(  the  infirmity  of  the  ftone,  thatthe  Ani^els  of  God  Jhall  di- 
reft  thee  in  thy  he»rt  and  »:ind,  how  thou  Ihalc  ule  thy  body,  to  the  health  and  comfort  ot  thy 
ftrenglh.  And  when  th.u  art  at  thy  joiirnies  end  amongtt  fuch  friinJs  ^nondthefeas  as  thou 
kjtowejl^Godjhall  and  will  raife  thee  as  faithful  friends  (jj-  now  I  have  [aid  bef  re')  m  JoCcph  had, 
fo  ftalt  ihoti  be  favoured  with  God  and  man  ;  for  hit  the  will  and'purpfeof  Godto  have  thee 
to  be  obedient  unto  t'^is  the  which  I  do  make  k^nown  unto  ther,becaufe  thou  jhopldii  n  t  remain  here, 
to  be  beholding  unto  tliofe  that  are  thy  mortal  enemies,  and  had  rather  to  hear  of  thy  end, 
th.iH  othsYwifi  to  hear  o^'  thy  well-doing,  or  any  good  to  be  d  ne  unto  thee  by  any  man  ;  it  if  a.  grief 
and  a  lp:ghcin  headand  mind  unto  them,  that  thou  Ihouldftcome  to  any  help,  or  thui^s 
necLlHuy  for  mans  Wic  here  upon  earth,tke  which  man  cannot  be  without.  And  John  Dee,  I  am 
f»  cow»w>j^  thee,  that  folhonly  as  thou  canlt  by  all  meauspollible,  fee  thy  things  hi  order, 
for  ty  lViirienjhiJ>,and  in  all  other  caufs  of  worldly  affairs.  *,  And  for  maintenance  to  further 
thy  j'jurny  God  wiu  mo^i  gracioufly  raife  thee  up  fome  good  friends  to  be  helping  unto  thee^tfiat  thou 
7}iaiit  have  maintenance  intky  journy.  AndthyViry  friettd  John  Pontoys  jhalihy  Gods  favour  Joh^  f  on- 
come  homc,andhe  Ihail  andwill  be  a  great  aid  iinto  thee,t  perform  this  courfe  thi  which  God  by  tcys. 
7ne  hath  com  na  idedt'-'ee  to  undertake :  T^at  where  thou  doji  lit)  now  in  wan,  and  to  be  beh  Iding 
unto  thofe,  wbj  do  not  love  th:e,  neither  in  heart  do  wijh  thee  well  -,  fo  God  would  have  thee  to  be 
where  thou  In  It  do  hnn  fervice,tf?»ii  God  wiUgive  thee  long  days  in  fu  diing^and  frdfiLing  this  bis  Lon"  life. 
Co»imandment  andwillby  me  Raphael, i^fw/«^'t  meJJ'agel  a»i  at  God>  wiU  andhn  pi  afure  plainly 
to  ,}iake  known  unto  thee,that  it  it  hn  will  to  have  t  .<ee  to  folLwthis  c.urfe,  in  which  God  will  havs 
thee  to  enttr  into.  Not  fearing  nor  miitruiiingthe  we-Aknefa  of  chy  body,  butth..t  God  will  pre- 
serve th,  e  for  t'-'at  ttme,as  (hall  be  hit  go  d  will  and  pleafure,  that  thou  Jhalt  have  life  here  in  thit 
w  rld,tote  jf  merciful  a  God  to  deliver  thee  from  all  nuns  a>,d  dangers,  and  from  all  infirmities, 
even  with  us  ni'/ch  h  alth  m  thou  haji  had  in  this  time  as  thou  haji  liVcd  thuf  many  years  \  fo  God 
■Will  ha  ve  thet  to  follow  ''if  will  in  this  direi  ion,and  then  thou  Jhalt  have  all  things  aforefaid  per- 
formed unio  thee,  and  thou  (halt  then  have  fich  favour^  that  thou  fhalt  behold  his  bleffed  Crea- 
tures with  }hefe  thy  mortal  eyes :  an  I  if  thou  wilt  perform  to  the  uttermoji  of  thy  power  this  meff.tge 
fro'v  G  d  ly  me  delivered  •,  Then  G  d  will  in  hif  mercies  perform  all  that  is  promifed  unto  thee. 
And  exctjtt  thou  wilt  he  willing  and  d"ttful  fo  much  us  in  thee  lieth  to  make  gtod  thit,  the  which  I 
have  through  Gods  meam  declared  what  courfe  thou  muji  take  ;  and  if  thou  doit 't  noi^then  God 
Will  not  no  more  fnd  unto  thee,to  the  beholding  of  any  mum  earthly  eyes,any  of  his  t  leffed  Creatures, 
therefore  I  command  thee  from  God,as  I  am  his  faithful  Muiifter  and  bleffed  Angel  of  God,that 
thou  (houldsl  not  doubt  to  take  this  journy  in  hand,f or  God  will  te  with  thee  and  for  tliee,and  his  a  Si  Dens 
bleffed  Angels  yfe^rZ/tf  thy  comfortyevenas  the  Angel  of  God  was  the  comfort  unto  young  Tobias  i«  lobfcum 
hif  journey^ fo  God  will  deal  with  thee  in  thine.  And  fo  I  have  delivered  unto  thee  what  God  will  quis  comra, 
have  thee  to  do.  ""s. 

It  if  the  will  and  favour  of  Godto  give  the  dfmuch  underftandingof  Gods  mercies  towards 
thee  yet  for  to  come,  as  ever  mortal  man  had  delivered  luito  him  by  any  fpiritual  Creature 
from  God.  So  now  I  have  fully  ended  my  meffage.  Therefore,  fee  that  thou  John  Dee  be  as  ready 
to  perforin  it  to  the  greateji  of  thy  power, as  lovingly  ingivingGod  thanks  for  this  meffjge  delivered, 
becavfe  I  would  have  thee  to  be  fuch  an  one  as  jhall  not  endhit  dayesin  reproach,  and  rejoycing  of 
thy  enemies, hut  thou  Jhalt  have  time  and  days  to  live,  that  when  thoudieji,  and  Jhalt  depart  thit 
world^thou  (halt  die  with  fame  and  ynemory  to  the  end,  that  fuch  an  one  was  upon  the  earth,  Mir*cul** 
th.,t  God  by  him  had  wrought  great  and  wonderful  Miracles  in  hisfrvice.  Andthus  to  Gods  h'i~ 
fiour  and  h^  glo^y-,1  have  ended  my  meffage^ yielding  unto  Godall  honour,  andpraife,  and  tha>ikj 
for  all  his  blejjings,and  hif  great  benefits  bejiowed  upon  his  Creatures,  both  now  and  for  evermore. 
Amen.       Bleffed  be  God  in  all  hif  gifts,and  holy  in  all  his  wrkj.  Praifed  be  God.  Amen, Amen. 

A.  Amen. 

A.  Now,  O  God,  as  I  have  willingly  yielded  unto  thy  will  and  commandment  of  un- 
dertaking a  Journey  :  fo  I  befeech  thee  that  it  may  ftand  with  thy  good  pleafure  to  no- 
tifieunto  me  the  Country,  Region  orCity  unto  which  thou  wouldft  have  me  direft  my 
courfe  from  hence-forward. 

^.  Nothing  appeared. 

A  Voice  ......     A  Voice In  the  Name  of  God,  te  morrow  at  ten  of  tbecUck.. 

^.  So  be  it.  T 

A.  All  thank«:,  praife  and  glory  be  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the 
holy  Ghoftj  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 

E  e  e  a  A  Note 


3  5        A  true  Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBions,  mth  Spirits ^  6cc. 


A  Note  to  be  confideied. 

Mr.  Scclejlone^. 

In  the  houfe  at  the  breaking  up  of  the  place  were  thefe  :     James 
Bolton.^     Lettice  Gojlwich  a  Maiden,  Cook  and  Dairy -maid. 

TO  l{fiorv  the  houfe  and  place  therein  where  it  is '-^  or  if  it  be  in  many  pla- 
ces divided,  which  they  are. 
Or  if  any  other  be  privy  of  it,  who  may  give  any  evidence. 

And  whatfoever  may  make  this  a  perfeft  work,  to  Mr.  Ecclejioaes  rea- 
fonable  contentment,  moft  humbly  and  heartily  I  befeech  God  to  make 
known  now  unto  us,  and  fo  the  praife  and  thanks  due  to  God  for  his  mer- 
cies,to  thebeft  of  our  power  to  be  yielded  unto  him. 


Saturday,  fuliiii,  horaio,  ante  meridiem. 

Note  J  In  the  Original  two  Schedules  are  pinned  acrofs  this  page. 
The  firji  Schedule.  To  enquire. 


^He  Name  of  the  place  whether  I  am  to  dire^  my  total  Journey. 
(I}au  I  ha', 


i 
I 


j_       2.  whom  Jl^all  I  have  in  my  company  heftdes  John  Pontoys. 

3.  fVhat  of  Patrick  Sanders. 

4.  fVhat  of  my  daughter  Katherine. 

5.  what  of  my  jianding  Bookj  and  other  appurtenances, 

what  of  Mr.  Bardolf  to  go  with  me^         Or, 
Of  Mr.  Dortnall  his  Companion  .<=* 

6.  what  Jloallmy  Son  Arthur  do^  to  his  help  and  comfort  in  his  intended 
travel  ? 

7.  shall  not  I  at  any  time  return  hither  into  England  again  ? 

shall  1  make  account  to  keep  fome  title  of  enjoying  my  houfe  at  my 
return .«' 


(i5\dr.  Eccleflone  his  QaJLj. 

Junii  27.     1^07.  The  fecond  Schedule. 

THe.  Name  of  my  Houfe  is  Ecclefton  of  Ecclefton,  the  mans  Name  whom 
I  fufped  is  Thomas  Webfter  Carpenter,  of  the  age  under  fourty,   not 
more,  within  the  County  c/ Lancafter. 

The  place  was  in  a  falfe  Roof  adjoyning  to  a  Chimney  called  New  Chamber 
chimney. 

Edward  Eccleflone. 

Thomas  Webfler  the  Thief, 


Note. 


A  true  %damn  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Mions^mth  Sfirits,dcc,        ^37 


Note :  There  being  a  Figure  in  a  fingleleaf  of  paper, 
and  the  fame  having  no  direftion  where  it  fhould  be 
placed,  I  thought  beft  to  place  it  here,  the  page  im- 
mediately aforegoing  making  mention  of  one  IVebJier 
a  Thief,  and  here  being  words  which  (if  I  mi/Hkenot) 
relate  to  fuch  a  bufiners,i?«  unquam  rccnperabitur,  whe- 
ther that  was  ftoln  fhall  ever  be  recovered  '■>  and,  in 
quo  loco  jam  eji^)  In  what  place  IVebJter  the  Thief  is  at 
prefent. 


1.  Significat  Domina 
Afcetidentif  &  oitav£, 
reciiper/irf  poffe. 

2.  Applicans  per  fed 
cum  receptione  ,  recu- 
pertri  pijfe  fignificat, 
fed  Cum  difficultate  ali- 
qua. 

4.  Not  a  locunty&fig- 
mm  eji :  &  An- 

cilltt  vel  fxmina.  aliquti 
conftderandit  ejt. 

4.  Lummariafefe  mu- 
tuo  refpicientia^mnpofi- 
erdum  fore  denotat  5. 
&  ntaxime  Can  Domi- 
nui  medii  crli  car  per  e 
7.  fexali  radio  refpic'uit 
fed  interim  7'.  domum 
comburat. 


.      JESUS 

A  Domino  faftum  eft  iftud  &  eft  mirabile  in  oculis  noftris.  Ex  ftercore 
erigit  pauperem  ut  coUocet  eum  cum  principibus  populi  fui.  AmcH. 

Mittas  (O  Deus)  lucem  tuam  &  veritatem  tuam,  ut  ipfa  nos  ducant5mi- 
rabiiem  in  me  fac  mifericordiam  tuam,  &  fapientiam  tuam  in  corde 
meo  figas. 

A  Voice.  T  ^w  Raphael  tto  jljffl^,  if  you  will  have  int/^o  appear,  proceed  ht  hajie,  for  God 
X  hi'th  appoiiitedme  great  fervice  to  do. 

A.  In  the  Name  of  Jefus,  we  defire  your  anfwers  and  inftruftious  to  thefe  Articles 
here  (lightly  noted. 

I.  Kaph.  In  theN<trne  of  Jefus  Chrift,  /Raphael  am  now  fent  unto  you  to  deliver  unto 
you  your  quejiion  fo  far  forth  at  God  his  will  and  pleafure  is  to  command  me,  and  I  muji  make 
a  fl}ort  continuance  with  you,  for  I  have  fervice  of  God  commanded  me  in  hafie  to  be  done,  in 
his  bleffed  Name  I  am  come  to  fulfil  his  will  in  your  de fires,  and  therefore  in  hit  Name  go  on. 

I.  ^.  The  name  of  the  place. 

Raph.  John  Dee,  thou  haji  been  a  Traveller,  and  Godhath  ever  yet  at  any  time  provided  for 
thee  in  Jill  thy  Journeys,  fo  much  Gods  favour  and  his  mercies  is  fuch  toward  thee,  that  this  thy 
requeji  and  defire  to  be  hjiown^  What  Country  is  beft  fof  thy  good  ;  God  hath  referred  it  to 
thy  own  will  to  make  choife,  in  what  Country  or  City  thou  hajl  thy  beji  minde  unto  ;  and  when 
thou  haji  made  thy  choife,  if  it  be  Gods  Ukjng,  and  to  thy  good,  it  (hall  be  direfted  unto  thee  ; 
otherwife,if  it  jhall  be  made  kjiown  that  fame  ether  place  Jhall  be  better  for  thee  :  Therefore 
takf  thy  own  choife  and  likjng. 

A. 

Raph.  John  Dee,  he  that  hath  commaniei  thee  to  takf  this  Journey  in  hand^ke  will  provide 
for  thee  in  Germauy,or  any  other  Country  wherefoever  thou  goeji.  Therefore  let  thy  good  will  and 
Ukjng  be  in  placing  thy  felf,  if  thou  wilt  be  near  unto  England  or  far  off. 

A.  Whether  is  beft,  I  know  not. 

Raph.  I  have,  faid,  that  wherefoever  thou  wilt,  God  doth  prize  thy  willing  defire,  to  fulfil 
that  God  doth  command  :  think,  ^«t  ^hou  fatisfie  and  reji  in  takjng  thy  own  choife^  God  will  pro- 
vide for  thee,  whither  and  to  what  City  thou  hd\i  a  minde  or  will  to  ejiter  into,  and  always  Gods 
good  Angel  (hall  hold  thee,  and  ever  give  thee  to  underfiand,  what  and  where  (hall  be  ever 
beft  for  thy  good  liking,  when  thou  art  there.  Therefore  take  no  care,  he,  that  Almighty  will 
provide  for  thee,  that  thou  Jhalt  be  fo  governed  with  his  goodnefi,  that  all  fhall  ftand  well 
with  thee. 

a.  A.  Whom  (hall  I  have  In  my  company  befide  John  Pontoys  ? 

3,  4.  Raph.  John  Dee,  thou  of  thy  felf  dofi  beji  kflow  that  witlxout  thy  daughter  ;  thou 

canjl 


*  :^S  yitrae  ^/ation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  Mitons,  mth ^firits^dcc. 

caniiHcftewithuithir:  and  l/kjwfs  God  hiith  pnt  tkce  a  v.rj  koneft  and  well-dij^o[ed  yovng 
vian  to  go  vith  thee  in  thy  Journey.  Aiul  for  John  Pontoys,  he  fhall  be  one,  as  tliy  greattlt 
comfoit  iiridCi.t-ciaUyd,  next  uiko  the  Almighrj.  And  for  any  o\her  elfe,  it  is  at  thy  own 
s^ood  Will  and  tpeti-liking  whom  thou  will  c':iife  to  viak^  fit  thy  ptrpfe  for  neceffary  ,.f:Sj  for 
'hdps  about  thet;  Servimcs  I  mean. 

■5.  i.  VVhac  of  my  landing  tooks,  and  other  appurtenances  > 

RapLi.   )()hn  Dee,  thott  haji  jpokj-n  already  of  a  very  good  courfe  to  fnd  them  away^  nor  all 
at  once    but  fo"e  at  one  t!7»e,  and  font  e  at  another,  and  God  ffjal!  andwill  giv.'   thee  good 
J-hn  Ton-     fuccef  th  rein:   andlet  thy  friend  John  PontoySj  let  him  provide  fur  all  fitch  fur fofes.,  and  fo 
toys.  jhahthou  dowdl. 

A.  A^  I  Ivave  been  heretofore  hindred  of  many  of  good  purpofes  fulfilling,   fo  per- 
chance the  K.in^  will  nor  be  vvilHng  novv  to  grant  me  licence  to  pais  over  i'ea. 
Ra  ph.  He  Jhall  and  will  gr.m'  thee  licence. 

6.  s.  For  my  Son  Ar.hiir,  do  to  hishelp  and  comfort  in  his  intended  travel. 
Rapli.  U  th)  Son  do  bk:'  ^is  courfe  to  travel,  he  fl.  all  m  the  mean  while  do  well,  for  thy  fak^', 

heinz  a  father  unto  hi-y,God  will  favour  Hni.  And  when  thou  art  in  Jlace  where  God  harh  com- 
nti^Hded  thee  to  g  ,in  ihoit  ruvie  after  thy  being  iherc^thou  Jl.alt  he  able  to  dohimgo' d^in  h::![/. 
iH'S,  htm  for  fiich  things  m  h:  now  wanteth,  and  then  thou  Jhalt  tak^  him  near  unto  thee,  fo  that 
he  may  have  a  comfort  of  t^y  fatherly  help,  andthou  to  have  comfort  of  his  well-doing:  and  fo 
for  this  I  have  certified  thee. 

7.  ^.  Shall  not  I  at  any  time  return  hither  into  Engl.tnd  again  t 

Pvaph.  1  hou  jhalt  he  better  able  in  health  and  jtrength  of  thy  body  to  come  into  England  a~ 
gain,  it  thou  wilt  :  but  thou  fl^alc  fee  and  perceive  thy  felf  fo  mercifully  provided  fr,  t'-'ut 
thou  wilt  have  but  little  minde  or  willingnef  to  come  into  England  again,  fucb pall  Gods  great 
mercies  be  towards  thee. 

A.  Then  I  perceive  that  I  fhall  not  make  any  great  account  of  keeping  my  hoiifc  at 
Mortlak^  for  any  my  return  hither. 

Mr.  Ecclejlon  his  Cafe  of  his  money  taken  away  by  one  Thomiu  Welficr,  &c. 

Raph.  Thoii  dcjl  taf{e  an  hard  matter  in  hand.  This  man  Thovm<>  W^h&cr  had  it,  anli 
hath  it  in  his  keeping  as  yet,  but  he  will  not  yield  that  he  hath  it.  And  for  Eccleiton  to 
deal  by  extremities  with  him,  he  jhall  prtvatl  little,  he  Jhall  not  thereby  obtain  his  purpjfe.  But 
by  friendly  dealing  with  the  farty,  and  in  proffering  hint  to  be  a  partaker  with  him,  he  mjy 
yield  unto  Ecclefton.  But  otherwife^  the  matter  will  grow  hard.  I  would  from  God  advife 
thee,  John  Dee,  to  enter  as  few  of  thefe  matters  as  may  be,  for  this  will  not  be  compnffed,  ex~ 
cept  that  he  jhall  proceed  into  the  m^s  houfe  according  unto  Law  ;  tnd  then  he  jhall  entangle 
hinifdf  into  trouble,  and  for  the  thing  never  the  better  :  but,  as  I  have  faid,  by  friendly  deal- 
ing he  way  yield,  and  fo  far  forth  as  it  jhall  pleafe  God^  I  will  work  by  Gods  favour  to 
make  him  yield.     And  thus  much  J  have  faid,  and  let  it  fuffice. 

It  doth  remain  as  yet  in  a  Coffer  that  is  fomewhat  of  a  white  colour,  hut  he  will,  if  he  he 
ftirred  he  will  then  remove  it,  and  hide  it  in  the  ground  in  a  little  Parlour  that  he  hath.  And  fo 
I  have  fpokfn  and  anfwered  thee  at  this  time,  as  concerning 

A.  Money  1  had  lent  mcfrom  the  Emperour  by  HansBiK-  I  marvel  that  it  is  not  yet 
come  hithei. 

Raph.  For  that,  John  Pontoys  will  maks  known  unto  thee,  all  to  thy  good.  And  in 
whofe  Name,and  in  his  whofe  Power  I  came,  fo  now  again  I  return  to  that  place,to  the  which  in  his 
mercies  bring  all  hit  hlejfed  Creatures,  yielding  all  honour  and  praife  unto  his  holy  Name,  I 
end.     Amen,  Amtn. 

A-  Amen. 


[^  day  of  fi4[)i^  hora  ii 


2* 


A.     A  ^  ^  ^^^^  ^^  Dinner  with  Bartholomew  Hickjnan,  my  Daughter,  Patrick^  and  Themns 
f\  Jurner,  about  the  end  of  the  Dmner  Bartholomew  heard  a  Voice,  faying,  T# 

morrow  half  an  hour  after  9  of  the  clock,  give  your  attendance  to  know  the  Lords  ple«- 

fure. 

A.  As  near  as  I  remember,  fo  he  faid,  orto  chat  cffcft, 

1^07. 


A  true  delation  of  Dr.  Dee  his  Mions,  with  Spirits.^c,  ^  ;9 

1^07  fuliii$,  hor.^U  ante  meridiem. 

JESUS 

In  nomine  Del  Patris,  &  Filii  &  Spiritiis  Sanai.      Amen. 

Mittas  iHcemtnam  &  veritaUmtnam.r'ipenttam  6^  ommmodumauxi- 
luim  Utnm,  Domine  Deus,  ut  tibi  Jerviawus  f unite,  fiddtter  &  con- 
Banter  omnibus  diebus  vit£noUr£.     Amen. 

garth The  Creature. 

^Nihemmeof  him  that  created  me  Raphael,  and  all  ^e  hleSfed  Creatures    and  li}^mje  m 
YhltZrZade  aU  the  world,  and  all  thtngs  theretn  contained  :  Jefi.s  Chnft  «/^^  gnat  good-  Jef.s  Ch.fi 
«  JL7m  n. -^  at  h^  wl  and  fo  I  am  hound  at  hU  wiU to  return,  when  h.  fleafure  ..  M 

God  hilb  jem  ine  jor  javt:niyj>*^  .,  if^  are  mt  hr  me  to  enter  into,  neither 

itrmy^ucb^A<^oit\tit)xtAiaaajj^^i^^tv^<,  and  doti,  .ppoint  to  Jt^.W  hii 

x,t.r,MP  •  and  he,  the  party  the  owner  to  have  his  money  again,  in  fo  port  time  of  may  vc 
SSl"    ;/  tpt^.L  Lo  le  Almighry.     GodW.W  have  the  whole  matte,  made  known  . 

mination  ,  J^l'^^^^  7.";"°Li  [.rrow  ;  and  fo  the  tarty  the  owner  (haU  fo  come  by  his  goods  Y'^ld. 
pM,tbroughGodsbel^,to^^h^^^^^^^^  ^^  j  have 

aeain.     And  now  I  have  '^»\f^^rc(l  youinasa  j  j^r.iar.d.  bv  Gods  help  (hall 


C 

yfithfi 

'  "1;  If  It  (hould  not  offend  then  I  wot^d  gladly  know  the  fum  of  the  Tieafure, 

Ruph.  Twothoufandandahalf,  and  odde  money. 

A.  How,  in  £!oldandlilver>  ,  .        , , 

Raph.  Moretbenthree^artsthereof  '\^'X'..,^^.^ 

^.  Voft  humbly  and  heartily  J^^\^"Viv  t "/4  7c  «ce;;;«V  'the  entring  into  the  courfe 

of  thy  Journey  ^  ««^  ^'^^^'i^''{f  "'ij/S^^^^^  >«erde.  n;.k?  *fc^e  anfwer,  ^  .r^-y, 


wy  vuay,  v.^».  ^<..  ,-  --^  V              -        com'^ort  vnto  Godi  honour,  m  maKui^  ui  n^^ ^^^.^•^ 
jb/ive  made  kiiQwn  unto  thee  ;  /ra^fe  I  »«^-  ^ 


^ 


^o        A  true  ^Relation  of  Dr.  Dee  hk  Altwru,  mth  Spirits^  dec. 


A 

John  Dee,  God  duth  knbw  aU  this  that  thou  doji  jpeak^  of.     In  few  words,  to  end  many 
di,  he  will  fo  direa  thy  wayes  in  ending  fuch  troubhs,  as  jhall  be  to  thy  good  atid  fpeedy 


words,  he  wi 
jinijhing 

A 


A 

John  Pontoys,  before  fuch  time  of  thou  flyalt  have  any  great  caufe  to  ufe  hit  aid,  and  fur- 
theremore,  God  ■fvill  fo  wori^for  thee  in  the  heart  of  hit  Majin  {whtnrheis  Factor  jor")  Stapers 
I  mea}i,that  Sta\n'rs  JhaU  with  all  the  aid  and  help  that  he  canto  further  thy  good  proceeding.And 
fo  God  in  ell  cafes  will  thus  gracioufly  deal  with  thee.  And  now  is  wy  full  time  to  depart  in 
Gods  peace,  and  to  ferve  him  from  whom  I  came,  his  mighty  N'lme,    • 

A.  I  fearing  his  fiidden  departure,  did  earncftly  urge  at  his  hands,  to  know  the  truth 
of  Johiits  his  hiitory  :  and  fo  half  unmannerly  did  interrupt  his  fpeech  with  my  que- 
ftion. 


howmany  he  had  dejiroyed  :  and  I  brought  hijn  through  Gods  power  home  again,  and  delivered 
him  in  health  vnto  his  own  parents.  And  thm  wiich  I  have  mfdi  thee  plainly  to  underftand  with- 
out any  doubting  to  the  contrary .  And  f  now  once  again  I  da  depart.  All  honour  and  glory  to 
the  everlajiing  God,  both  now  and  for  evermore.     Amin,  Amen. 

A.  Amen. 


17  fuly. 


A 


Fter  dinner  {horam  circiter  4  JJ)  as  Bartholomew  and  I  talked  of  divers  of  my  doings 
with  Mr.  KeHey^  a.  Voice  produced  this  to  Bartholomews  hearing. 


A  Voice I,  John  Dee,  I  Live  heard  you  all  this  while. 

Ihou  (halt  be  able  to  do,  and  to  fee,  and  Xo  underftand  more  than  all  this  as  thouhaft  /pollen 
of,  according  as  God  hath  prniifed  thee. 

A.  Blefledbe  his  holy  Name,  and  his  mercies  be  magnified  oil  me,  to  the  honour  of 
his  holy  Name.     Amen. 

A.  Note Upon  occafion  of  further  talk  and  jfffcfc  of  wy  Jewel  that  was  brought, 

I  asked  Bartholomew  if  ever  he  had  feen  it  fince  it  was  fet  in  gold ;  and  he  thought  that  he 
had  not  feen  it  :  Whereupon  I  went  fpeedily  to  my  Cheft,  unlocked  it,  and  took  it  out, 
and  imdid  the  Cafe,  and  (ec  the  Stone  in  his  due  manner. 

And  by  and  by  did  Raphael  appear  in  the  Stone,  and  in  voice  faid  thus,  as  fol- 
loweth  : 

Raph.  Inthe  Name  of  Jefuf  Chrift,  I  am  Kzj>h^e\  who fe  voice  thou  didH  hear  right  now. 
And  now,  in  Gods  holy  Name,  for  thy  good,  and  for  thy  comfort,  I  have,  now,  here,  in  thi^  Pearl 
entred  PoflTellion,  in  token  hereafter  to  be  that  blejfed  Creature,  to  be  obedient  unto  Gods  Com- 
mandment, to  (erve  thee  at  all  times^  when  thou  art  placed  in  thy  Journey,  which  God  hath 
Dei  do-      I  commanded  thee.     And  likjwife  thou  (halt  have  the  book  from  whence  this  came.     And  that 
V''a"'a        ^  ^"'^  which  thou  haji  in  keeping,  Qthe  which  thou  doft  mak;:  account  of  no  better  but  duft')  Then  it 
/'  *,     '    '  (hall  be  turned  tothe  right  ufe,  fronvwhence  it  was  :  and  to  that  good  purpofe, that  Godhath 
^  '  ordained  for  to  do.     And  now  it  was  the  will  of  God,  that  I  (l.'Ould  ff'ea\  unto  thee  a  few  words 

of  this  good  comfort  to  be  performed.  Fraife  God,  honour  his  holy  Name,  for  his  great  ble^ings 
now  and  for  ever;  That  it  did  pleafe  the  Almighty  to  fend  me  to  your  pre  fence,  into'kfn  of  his 
love,  for  his  great  mercy.  And  fo  now,  in  his  Name  I  go  again  into  the  prefetice  of  the  Almigh- 
ty, whofe  Name  be  ever  praifed,  with  all  his  eleil  Angels,  and  all  the  bleffed  Creatures  of  Gody 
and  all  the  bleffed  Creatures  upon  earth,  praife  his  Name  for  evermore.     Amen,  Amen. 

A.  Amen. 

A.  O  Lord  God,  moft  humbly,  heartily  and  finccrcly  I  honour  thee,  praife  thee,  and 
cxtoll  thy  mercies,  and  moft  loving  kindnefs,  for  thefe,  and  all  other  thy  graces  and 
bleflings  on  me.  Accept,  O  God,  my  hearty  thanks,  and  enable  me  foto  thank  thee,  a« 
may  be  a  moft  acceptable  facrifice  unto  thy  Divine  Majefty.    Amen,  Amettj  Amen. 


iSOj: 


A  true  "Ration  of  Dr.  Dee  /;«  JBionSyVfith  Spirits,dcc»        *  4i 


idoy.  Se(t,$,  hora^U  eS\dorl;la{. 

Mitte  Incemtuam  &  veritatemtnam  Domine,  qua  nos  ducant  c^ per' 
dncdftt  ad  montem  fan&um  tunm  df^  ad  cteleffia  tna  tabernaaila. 
Amen. 

Barth.  He  is  in  the  Stone  now. 

Benedilius  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini. 

OMoji  merciful  Lord  and  Savitur  Chriji  Jeftu,  who  it  and  tp.w  the  Creator  and  Redeemer 
of  Mankjndty  and  of  all  hit  blejfed  Creatures.  In  bis  power  I  Raphael  am  now  come  at 
hit  will  and  commandmenty  and  fo  likfwife  at  his  good  fleafure  I  muji  then  return  at  fucb  time 
Of  be  hath  commanded  me.  "-     •       ' 

John  Dee,  in  the  Name  of  the  Mojl  Higbeji,  I  am  come  tt  deliver  unto  thee  tih  my 
Mefj'age,  the  which  God  in  his  goodnefi  hath  commanded  me. 

Firfi,  I  Raphael  am  fent  of  God  at  this  time  mofi  chiefly  to  fut  thee  in  that  good  remem- 

hranse  of  my  laji  appearing  to  your  frefence,  to  let  thee  to  underjiand,  that  loo}{,  what  courfe 

God  iit  his  mercies  did  fet  then  down,  what  way  thou  fhouldU  ta\e  to  enter  into  this  Journey, 

the  which  God  in  his  goodneji  is  mofi  willing  that  thou  jhouldfl  enter  into.     For,  John  Dee, 

God  hath  detlaredy  and  made  manifefily  kjiewn  unto  thee  at  my  lafi  appearing,  what  fervice 

Cod  would  ufe  thee  untOy  and  all  fuch  purpofes  that  were  the  lafi  time  Ipekfnof,  jhallbebyGodi 

favour  and  his  merciful  good  gift  performed  unto  thee  :  and  fear  thou  not,  but  God  will 

fafely  help  and  prefcrve  thy  body  in  thy  Journey,  to  that  end,  that  thou  fhouldeft  be 

in  tha  t  place  wherein  thou  mighteft  have  time  to  enter  into  all  fuch  fervice  as  God  hath 

by  me  ma'de  known  unto  thee.     For^  John  Dee,  fuch  hath  Gods  mercies  been  in  fuffer- 

ing  wicked  men  to  prevail  againft  thee,  and  they  have  and  do  make  a  fcom  qf  thee  here 

in  this  thy  Native  Countrey  :  So  it  is  with  thee  as  it  was  with  Chrifi  and  his  Apofiles^  being 

mofi  cruelly  ufed  in  their  own  Native  Ctuntreys ;  fo  John  Dec,  God  hath  fnffered  thofe  wic- 

h^ed  men  to  pluck  thee  down  in  worldly  affairs,  the  which  jhould  be  maintenance  for  thee  and 

for  thine^  and  without  fuch  maintenance  mancannot  be  without ^  while  he  is  here  in  this  vale  of 

Mifery.     Such  wicked  men  have  mofi  cruelly  ufed  thee,  even  as  Job  by  Gods  fufferance,  who 

fuffcred  the  Devil  to  prevail  againfi  him  :  yet  Gods  mercies  be  fo  great  unto  theey  that  although 

they  Qmofi  wickedly")  have  robbed  thee  of  thy  poffeffion,  yet  God  would  not  fufer  thofe  wicked 

ones  by  any  of  their  malicious  praUices  to  prevail  in  any  wife  to  hurt  thy  body,  as  Jobs  wm  : 

For  if  they  Qirough  their  wicked  purpofes)  could  have  wrought  fuch  cruelty  againfi  thee,  thou 

bad^  not  been  a  man  living  here  upon  earth  until  this  time.     So  John  Dee,  thou  dofi  kfiow  who 

k  thy  mortal  enemy,  who,  rules  next  unto  your  earthly  King. 

A. 

Why  thou  maift  well  kpow,  for  I  have  made  it  kftown  before  time  unto  thee,  that  he  is  not  thy 
friend,  though  thou  hafi  not  offended  him  in  any  wife,  'therefore,  beeaufe  that  this  thy  Na-' 
tive  Countrey  is  not  a  place  fit  for  Gods  purpofes  in  his  wifdome  to  be  beftowed  upon  thee 
here,  Therefore  at  my  lafi  Meffage,  God  did  fend  me  to  maks  kifwn  unto  thee,  whether  he 
would  have  thee  to  go,  t;b<it  t^ere  tfco«  mightft  bc  a  man  ;  and  that  man,  whom  God  hath 
appointed  to  make  his  Wifdome  known  :  for  thou  art  that  man  whom  God  hath  cbofen,  that 
( acctrding'y  Jt  it  was  p/^  jifjtfr^rfj  J  "that  itb" mortal  man  in  flefli,  but  onely  £«oc^,  had 
orfhall  have  the  like  wifdome  made  ifiown,  plainly  to  be  underftood  by  any  man,  or 
thou  thy  felf  (halt  under fiand  and  receive  at  the  hands  of  the  Almighty.  Tberef.  re  it  is  bit 
will  and  purpofe  of  God,  that  he  would  have  thee  in  that  Countrey,  for  this  thy  Native  Coun- 
trey is  not  worthy  of  gifts  that  thou  (halt  receive  at  the  hands  of  God,  to  come,  and 
to  be  made  known  unto  thofe  which  be  not  worthy  of  fuch  great  gifts  of  Gods  wif- 
dome, to  come  amongft  thofe  that  be  unworthy. 

Therefore,  John  Dee,  in  all  thefe  matters  the  which  in  favour  at  thii  time  made  kjlOT»H 
unto  thee,  the  ektef  and  greatefi  caufe  of  this  my  coming  unto  thee ,  is  to  ma^e  the  matter 
plainly  known,  that  God  in  his  mercies  would  have  thee  with  all  diligence  that  thou  canfi  poffibly, 
to  hajle  thee  to  that  Countrey  where  Cod  doth  ctmmand  thee,  and  at  my  lafi  bting  here  thou 

Fff  hiftiffJ^ 


_  ±'2.  Atrtiv^lation  of  Dr.  Dee  bis  AHions^  vpith  Spirits yd^c. 


kjtcwejT  what  w<K  r»y  M^jfugei  therefore  do  thy  diligence  to  fulfil  it  at  thou  canji^  and  God 
will  pt  hk  great  helps  vnto  thee,  in  ilrengtkning  of  thy  io'ly,  aud  otherwise,  which  jhtill  le 
to  thy  "cod.  Anil  thou  being  once  in  that  flace  vrhere  God  wovld  have  thee  to  he^  thou  Jhouldsl 
well  prceive  and  f.ainJy  underjland,  that  God  tcill  we/f  mercifully  work^  with  theg  for  thy 
good  i«  performins  all  fiich  promifes,  the  which  hath 'ie:n  loth  at  the  lajl  time  and  at  tha 

time  made  kjtown  unto  tkee. 

John  Dee,  I  do  fut  thee  inremewhrancej  that  whereas  thou  didii  fjy,  that  thou  hadU  a 
tortionof  money  feittkee  from  the  Em^eroiiT  unto  thee;  I  tell  thee,  that  the  Devil  in  work:- 
ing  in  the  heart  of  one  of  thy  enemies  (^Cook^  I  mean)  did  feek  fome  wajcs  by  his  falfe 
imuortant  ill  fpeeches,  in  moft  falfe  manner,  unco  one  that  did  in  fomewhat  lee  the  Em- 
perourto  imderftand,  what  he  had  molt  falfely,  to  thy  difci edit  (as  he  thoiighr)  to 
hinder  thee,  that  thou  Ihouldft  not  come  to  any  help  or  credit  at  the  £mperGur>  hand. 
tut  John  Dee,  be  of  good  comfort.  The  Empcrourof  all  Eniperours  will  be  thy  comfort, 
and  aid  thee,  and  evermore  p«r  down  thy  enemies,  that  the  Emperour  (that  thou  (ficuldil 
have  received  that  fortion  of)  it  jhaU  be  fo  with  thee,  th.n  be  Ihall  have  more  need  of 
thee,  in  fvchwifdowe  ,k  Gtd  jhaU  deliver  unto  thee;  for  tbcu  f.-alt  have  no  need  of  bi»t,  but 
oncly  to  keef  good  will  and  friendfhif  betwixt  hi^  and  thee,  in  Jhewing  thy  felf  friendly  vnt9 
him,  M  God  Ihall  hereafter  give  thee  plainly  to  unieriiand. 

Now,  John  Dee,  I  have  made  known  unto  thee  what  Gods  will  it  in  this  wy  meffage.  JhU 
ii  the  greateji  andthetnoji  frincif/U  caufe,  why  God  hath  fmt  me  unto  thee  at  this  pefent 
time.  And  now  I  have  through  Gods  mercies  delivered  this  hit  Commandment  unto  thee  :  and 
for  this  J  have  now  (aid  and  finijhed. 

A.  BlefTed  be  the  Almighty  God,  now  and  for  ever. 

Gladly  I  would  have  nnderllood  how  much  the  portion  was  which  the  Eniperour 
would  have  Tent  me. 

John  Dee,  let  it  go,  and  fpeal{  no  farther  of  it :  for  thou  maijl  be  joyful,  whereas  it  it 
[aid  unto  tb::e,  that  he  (hould  have  need  of  thee,  and  not  thou  of  kini.  therefore  reafon  no 
more  in  that  matter^  ■ 

A,  As  concerning  Mr.  Ecc/fjJoM, 

John  Dee,  in  few  words  1  aniwer  thee.  He  hath  dealt  with  the -parties  in  thofe  affairs,  hut 
the  ctJief  -party  wilt  not, as  yet,  yield  anything  to  be  made  k>iowM,  hut  doth  \tuhbornly  and  jioutly 
jiand  in  his  own  defence :  ^«i  Got/^  Cre/Jtr^rw  have  wrought  with  him,  and  nothing  be  will 
(as  yet)  yield  unto,  except  that  thofe  Creatures  JhouU  deal  fo  cruelly  with  him,  of  it  were  to 
pull  him  apieces  ;  this  it  hit  wicked  ttubbornnefl.  But  God  will  bring  the  matter  to  light  ;  but 
Ecclefton  hath  not  dealt  fc  in  the  matter  as  Ik  might  have  doHe,he  it  too  to/lack^in  hit  wn  caufe. 
Therefore  if  the  fault  be  in  him,  then  do  not  blame  the  Creatures  of  God.  For  God  could  (as 
you  vcr}'  well  do  know  it)  command  that  faid  Treafure  to  be  brought  :  but  he  will  not 
have  it  lo  to  be,  becaufe  it  fliaU  come  by  other  means  among  men  :  So  God  hath  a  great  care 
and  purpofe  to  do  all  for  your  ;<^ood,  to  k/ep  matters  out  of  blame  and  (lander  of  the  world. 
Of  it  might  come  topaffe,  if  it  jhould  come  by  any  other  wayes,  but  by  this  plot  whi'h  it  laid  down 
to  decline.  And  when  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  it  pall  be  delivered,  God  will  fo  perfor:-,}  it, 
i-'  man  will  do  as  he  fhoiild  do,  in  all  reverend  manner  towards  God-ward.  And  fc  n-jte  l 
let  yvu  to  perceive,  and  to  k^now,  that  it  it  not  of  yet  obtained, 

i\.  Whether  hath  the  other  party  confeffed  any  thing  ? 

Raph.  He  hath  n.t  of  y^t  yielded  openly  ;  but  he  hath  in  fecret  manner  prrfwaJed  hit  fel- 
low, that  the  matter  might  be  made  known  unto  Ecclefton,  in  confeffing  of  all  the  whole  maittr, 
hut  the  other  will  not  yet  yield :  but  it  were  better  for  him  to  yield  at  the  fir  f,  then  to  tarry 
any  longer,  the  leffe  would  be  hit  punifhment  from  God  therein.  And  fo  I  let  you  to  uHderjia,nd, 
that  you  JhaU  give  God  bit  time  to  work^  in  that  matter  at  hit  pleafure,  and  then  JhaU  it  be  to  the 
good  of  the  owner  J  and  of  you  Ukewife.     And  mif^l'b/fx'e  faid. 


If. 


r„„-^.  As  concerning  the  bereaving  me  of  n^^oifji^oods,!  would  gladly  undcrftand  who 
jiath  my  filver  double  gilt  bell-Salt,  and  othoi-  things  here  of  late  conveyed  from 
niee. 

Raph.  John  Dee,  Tbit  is  the  wiU  and  purpofe  of  God  to  command  thee,  although  thou 
dojl  fuffer  wrong  becaufe  thy  goods  be  fo  takjn  away  from  ^bee,  yet  Gods  will  it  fuch,  that  be 
wiU  havethee  tobe  a  p;ace-maker  in  this  Cf^ufe  :  foritispaft  help  to  have  it  again  :  But  as 
thou  art  a  mortal  father,  fo  ufe  that  matter  as  a  father,  for  thy  fon  had  it,  although  he 
would  not,  neither  will  confef!  it.  Andlikjwife  for  fuch  things  of  late  miffing  about  this  boufe, 
thou  fhalt  hereafter  at  plainly  kjtow  who  had  them,  and  how  they  Wire  gone,  a!  thou  do ji  plainly 
Mtderjiand  fi,r  thy  Salt,  hut  thou  Jhalt  jiay  and  proceed  no  further,  till  fuch  time  Of  I  Ra- 
phael fl^all  jS'f'tK  further  of  it,  for  God  will  have  all  things  to  he  dene  Well,  and  to  his  le^ 
itkjng.     So  for  that  J  have  now  [aid. 

A. 


A  tme%elatm r/  Dr.  Dee hts  /iBwns^\htth Spinti.dcc,         "^^^ 


A. 

John  Dee,  it  if  in  ihe  hanh  of  God  and  h;s  power  to  fend  thte  fticb  helps  as  thou  do{l  feek^of 
ifceTreafure  to  be  brcu'^ht  unto  thee,  but  God  will  not  have  it  fu  to  he,  the  while  thou  air  in 
this  place  (  England  1  ynean')  fcrGod  wiu  not  have  thee  to  come  into  any  difdnin^  or  flander 
might  tak^e  fomr  advantage  againiitheitt^  hut  be  content  with  that  little  that  car.be  made  of  thy 
right  in  the  CoUfdge  matters.  And.  further-more^  thou  ih alt  fee  that  Cod  wiU [end  thee  {oonfnte 
fuch  fmall helps  by  mun,  that  thou  (halt  have  fonie  feeling  of  hetf^  to  help  thee  whither  thou 
Jhouldji  go  ;  and  ther'^  ore  I  Knphzelhave  nowfaid. 

A  . . .  •  Jofan  Poutoys. 

JohnDee,id'Kor  to:  much  inq«ifttive,butwhatfJ.'aU  be  b.ft  toyctir  liking  in  any  gondcatif-what" 
foeveryou  or  he  l!  al  tiink^g  :od  to  be  done  for  your  giod,  God  will  put  his  ajfutance  and  help  that 
yoH  (f:aU  perctiv.  Cods  favour  therein.  And  thus  much  I  have  faid  :  at  G-ids  Commandment  1 
came.,  andfo  on  hts  ymrcifuU  goodn  ff^.,  and  his  po^er,  I  mufi  prefently  depart. 

A. .  .  Bartholomews  leqiieft  of  G  orge  Sherman  hiscarneft  ofc  and  dreaming  of  Tieafiirc 
to  be  under  the  lo'indation  of  the  wall  called  De  la  pry  wall,  a  Niiniy  in  times  paft  with- 
in half  a  mile  of  Northamptott,  Sir  JVilaam  late  his  houfe  is  within  that  wall  in  three 
pares. 

Jhat  man  may  lawfully  have  it,  if  he  tak^  heed  inthe  breaking  of  the         the  three  places^  for        ^qo. 
it  kf^rthe  greateji  part  under  the  bottom   of  t'^e  wull,  and  many  roots  of  thorns  and  trees  t' at 
■wiVlet  and  hinder  the  wrking  for  it,  if  be  di^  jtotviovk  much  as  Hope  as  you  can,  to  go  under 
the  roots,  the  which  he  may  wed  and  lawfully  do.     So  doing,  he  way  well  ootain  hu  furpofc  ;  and        200. 
n.w  you  have  plainly  inderji.od  the  truth. 

"the  one  part  of  that  Trea'ure  was  laid  by  an  old  Nun,  that  was  of  that  hovfe,  at  t^^at  time, 
and  cne  that  w^ts  her  brother,  and  the  other  waf  laid  even  at  the  fame  time,  that  the  fuyne 

travel  the  which  you  took^  the  la\i  duy  faving  one,  to  kjtow  of  that  battel,  11  was  hid  at  the  jame 
time  by  one  of  the  Lords  that  was  there  killed^  and  fo  it  hath  remained  ever  fince,  the  one  place 
Moreeafier  to  come  rft  then  the  other,  hvt  with  the  favour  of  God,aHd  inhis  mercy,xh^t  good  for- 
tune to  be  dellred<?t  ^rf)t/e(  fcfl«<^,  it  may  be  had  andcomp.ffed  by  ihe  (aid  pany.  Andfo 
710W  1  hnve  yrtude  ihe  matter  known  vnto you.  And  now  m  the  name  of  the  Alniig'ty,andmcrci-' 
fuL  Go^,  at  whufe  will  and  pleasure  J  came,  fo  now  I  depart  in  Gods  peace.  lhem:rrcies  of  God 
be  up  nyoT,  both  for  this  life,  and  for  that  which  is  to  come,  his  name  be  glorijyedfor  evermore 
Amen,  Amen. 

A.  Amen. 


160  J,  Munday  7.  Sept.  hora  7. 


A.  'T""'His  morning  as  Bartholomew  had  intended  to  be  going  homeward  in  the  morning, 
g      and  I  not  intending  to  move  an  aftion  now,  but  committed  all  to  God,  Bartholo' 
mew  was  fpoken  unto  by  Raphael. 

.  .  . . .  Command  John  Dec  to  come  up  into  tkii  place.  B^nbolo- 


i^.  ...  In  the  name  of  Jefus,  and  to  the  honour  and  clory  of  the  moft  blefTed  Trini- 
ty. A»ien.  JI& 

Mittas  0  omnipotens  fempitern;  &  ?/;?.»  "Dew  lucem  tuam  &  9eritatem  tuam,  qu£  nosducant 
&perd'icant  ad  montemfanaum  tiium  &  cxleftia  tuatabernacula.  Anien. 

Barth.  ....  He  is  here. 

A  .  . . .  Benedicius  ell,  qui  venit  in  nomine  Domini.  Amen. 

The  Almighty  God  be  bleffed  and  praifed  of  all  good  creatures,  give  praife  unto  his 
holy  name,  for  evermore.     Amen. 

John  Dee,  /  <z)«  the  fan)e bleffed  creatureKz^hztX,  that  did  appear  the  la^  day  but  ort"  itt 
this  place,  I  am  at  the  commandment  of  the  mo\i  highejl  to  come  unto  your  prefen-e  at  t'  it  time, 
iecaufe  thou  fhouldeji  very  well  know  that  I  Ka^h-de\  avi  very  ready  at  all  times,  to  come,  wh-n 
God  Ihall  command  me  ;  but  John  Dee,  I  have  no  long  mejfage,  at  this  time,  f  r  thou  haft  Go  is 
full  purpofc  and  his  will,  in  what  he  would  have  thee  to  enter  into,  and  beca'J--  that  thou  Ihalt 
X'ell  kjtow  tl^at  even  now  at  your  departing,  the  one  from  the  other,  it  hat'^  pleafed  God  to  fend  me 
to  let  thee  to  underjiand  that  for  this  time  no  wore  matters  (  as  concerning  what  thou  art  taught  ) 
JhaUuot  C  at  thu  time  )  »o  more  bejpoken  of,  untiU  fuch  time  m  God  jhaJl  appoint,  at  your  next 
meeting  and  con)iiig  to.^ft/.'f>-,  f/jrft  tZ-vw,  if  ttfr^^e /i?ry  t/>iKg,  that  if  not  dene  of  you,  fo  far 
forth  as  it  if  in  your  power  to  fulfill  it,  if  any  fuch  default  in  you  be,  I  will  then  put  you  in  remem- 
brance of  it,  and  help  you  in  any  tiding  which  yov  jhall  dotibt  of :  and  if  you  have  any  quejiionor 
demand  to  asi^tf  me,  even  mw,l  am  very  ready  in  few  words  to  anfwer  you,  and  then  in  hit 

F  f  2  ftame^ 


mew. 


4^  A  true  Ration  of  Dr.  Dee  his  JBions,  mth  Spirits.dcc, 


name, who  hath  fetit  me  (  that  it  the  Almighty^  I  niuji  return  therefore,  if  you  have  to  ask, 

do  it- 

^ As  concerning  Mr.  John  of  the  Ifle  of  Man^his  pitiful  cafe  hath  moved 

my  compaflion. 

Raph John  Dee,  ajfure  thyfelf,  that  as  thoudoft  moft  heartily,  with  a  good  faith inGcd, 

that  thou  wightejibe  that  man  wherein  God  will  tnofi  viercifully  help  hit  dijlrejfed  cafe,  therefore  I 
anffver  thee^tkatOod  hath,  and  he  will  hear  thee,  to  thy  comfort  therein,  and  to  the  great  com- 
fort of  the  man  whom  that  caufe  doth  belong  unto.  God  will  mercifully  help  thecaufe  fojhortly,  as 
his  will  and  plea  fur  e  it  to  be  done  in  it.  So  much  I  have  faidfor  this. 

^ I  thank  God  moft  heartily  for  his  fo  great  mercies. 

A  . . .  .  John  Pontoys,  my  great  friend,  earnelHy  delireth  to  know  his  good  Angel. 

Raph John  Dee, /or  %  pJ^e  he  J};all  kjiow  hit  good  Angel,  but  let  it  not  be  with  him 

hereafter  to  have  a.  pride  ininind,  that  God  hath  made  known  unto  him  his  good  angel,  for  no 
wan  Uponthe  face  of  the  earth  can  have  a  better  then  he  hath,for  Uriel  it  kit  appointed  Angel  from 
hit  birth  to  thit  day,  and  fojhall  eontinue  with  him  to  the  appointed  time,  that  God  will  take  h;t 
life  away  infeparatinghit  foul  from  kit  body,  for  Uriel  hath  been  under  God  hit  deliverer  forth 
of  many  danger i,  andfohejhall  be  hit  defence  under  God  to  hit  lifes  end.  And  for  thit,  I  have 
made  the  matter  plainly  k^;own  unto  you.  Frocede. 

A  . . . .  Secondly,  John  Pontoys  is  defirous  to  know  the  end  of  the  Polifh  troubles. 

Raph John  Dee,  in  few  words,  for  that  matter,  I  anfwer  thee.    Thofe  troubles  wUlfcme- 

what  end  to  hit  loffe  5  but  it  fl^all  be  no  great  matter,  fo  that  God  will  work,  the  cafc  that  it  jhall 
end  to  hislikjng.  And  tkus  much  for  this  I  have  faid. 

A....  As  concerning  the  man  and  the  Treafure,  lam  defirous  to  know  whether 
he  will  be  content  to  afTign  his  title  to  Bartholomew,  upon  fome  portion  thereof  delivered 
unto  him  ;  and  what  other  he  hath  made  acquainted  with  the  matter  ;  and  whether  it 
may  not  by  Gods  good  liking  be  fet  up  without  digging. 

Raph  ... .  John  Dee,  in  all  this  I  hear  thee,  and  I  k.now  thine  intent  herein.  That  man  may 
be  reasonably  ruled,  hut  yet  ke  will  not  put  over  kit  title  thereiu;  but  he  hath  ^.  that  bekjiowrng 
how  the  matter  doth  ji and  with  him,  and  fo  much  Of  hedothkjtow,  he  hath  wade  them  tokjiowiH 
much  as  himfelf:  Therefore  affure  thy  fe  If  that  ke  Jhall  be  ruled,  and  that  it  jhall  not  be  ^  he  will. 
If  he  will  not  be  ordered  in  fuch  fort  and  good  cou.ncel  as  IKA\t\ize\(k  all  give  unto  thit  Bartholo- 
'  niew  at  that  time,  that  then  hefhall  have  no  part  of  it,  but  I  certifie  you  that  he  will  be  ruled  ; 

but  onely  the  others,  which  I  have  made  kjiown  unto  you,  they  will  not  come  to  fo  good  courfe  in  the 
matter  as  he  will,  'therefore  let  it  rell,  I  will  direU  Bartholomew  in  the  matter  which  jhall  be  to 
hitgood,  or  elfe  it  Jhall  not  come  to  kit  hand,  the  which  you  have  to  kjiow  of.  And  for  this,  now  I 
have  f aid. 

John  Dee,  it  it  the  will  and  purpofe  of  God,  that  it  (l<al!  come  by  breaking  of  the  ground,  be- 
caufe  that  Cod  will  have  all  things  done  well,  that  no  difcord  may  break,  out  betwixt  the  parties 
hereafter.  And  fo  now  in  Gods  name  I  have  faid. 

A....  Mofthumbly  I  thank  and  praife  Almighty  God  for  his  infinite  mercies  and  fa- 
vour,  befeeching  him  to  aflift  mc  evermore.  Amen. 

A  . . .  .John  Pontoys  would  fliortly  fall  to  work  fomewhar,  to  win  fome  help  for  mony  by 
diftillations  and  Alchymicall  conclufions,  till  we  were  ocherwife  holpen,  and  we  are  ut- 
terly vmable  to  provide  things  neceflary  for  lack  of  fufficient  proviliou  of  money. 

Raph Trouble  not  thy  f elf  (  as  yet  )  with  thefe  caufes. 

A  . .  •  If  Captain  Langham  will  lend  me  an  hundred  pounds  or  more,  as  he  prom  ifed 
me,  forwhich  my  fervant  P<Jtjijd^expe£l:eth  his  performance  at  this  hour. 

Raph.  ...Not  Qinfuch  time)  t  0  V  0    T  OV  GOOD. 
Note.  Jofcw  Dff,  that  is  the  plain  meaning,  wherein  it   is  faid,  not  to  do  thee  good,  becaufeit 

will  befomething  too  long  (  for  thou  art  ready  for  it,  if  it  were  now,  therefore  with  all 
haft,  fo  much  as  is  in  Gods  will  to  be  done  in  it,  it  (hall  be  haftened  forward  to  do  thee 
good. 

And  now  I  have  plainly  fpoi^n  unto  thee  in  this  cafe  ,  my  time  appointed    of  God  is  at, 
hand- 
Ihn   Po».        John  Dee,  thonhafl  fulfilled  two  quejiions,  as  concerning  fohi\  Pontoys,  look-in  thy  Note, 
toys  note.  Jokn  Pont.     Oh  that  1  might  be  fit  to  ferve  you  xnBartholomews  abfence. 

Raph John  Dee,  In  the  name  of  the  moji  higheji  I  anfwer  thee,  to  this  hit  defire  wherein 

he  doth  crave  at  the  hands  of  Cod,  for  to  obtain  the  fight  of  hit  bleffed  creatures ;  but  hereafter 
it  Jhall  be  wwiitf  known  unto  thee  what  God  will  do  for  kim  in  that  hit  defire.  And  now,  all 
power  and  glory  be  given  to  the  Almighty  who  hath  made  heaven  and  eart,h,  his  name  be  magnified^ 
and  praifed  everlajiingly.  Amen,  Amen. 

A  . .. .  Amen. 

A.. .  .  All  praife,  all  thanks,  all  honour  and  §,\ory  be  yielded  unto  God  of  all  his 
Creatures,  now  and  for  evermore.  Amen. 

£^.  John 


A  true  %^lation  of  Dr.  Dee  h'ti  JBiottf,  mth  Spirit  s^  d<c,        *  ^y 


John  Pontojs  note,  which  he  wrote,  and  left  on  my  ftudy  tabic,  ■j.^eptemb.  TheNocc. 
//  it  mayftani  with  the  will  and  have  of  the  Almighty  ,  whofe  name  be  bleged  for  tver^ 


A. 

viiuie. 


more. 

I  would  defire  to  know 

1.  My  proper  Angel. 

2.  The  end  of  the  Polifii  troubles. 

3.  Othat  I  might  befit  tofcrve  you  in  Bartholomews  ih^encc. 


Vnder  John  Pontoys  Note  the  which  isfoTPed  over^  is  thus  zpritten^ 


The  place  of  Bafel 

in  the  Map  of 

Eurofe. 


To  the  left  or  next  fide 


2  foot,  and  about 
4  inches 


^ 


Bafel 

City 

o 


•to  the  edge  of  the  Map  below 
4  foot  and  a  finger 
from  Bttfet, 


I.     A   Kney  vah  ndgadeth  adneyox  vah^naxh  gettifeh  ah  orza   vaU  gemntah^  oh  gedvam  on 
_/\    zembahnohhitd  vomfah  oldru  amfh/tnots  admancha  nonfah  vamfas  ornad,  alphol  an~ 
ditK  orzadah  vos  aufohhanfahvoh  adma.  wha  notma,  goth  vamfed  aigcs  oufeple  oudemax  orzan, 
unfa  onmah  vndahra  goufah  goh  tiahad  Na. 

2.  OxarVar^nol  pan  f'tmpas  OS  <il  pans  orn.'j  audfu  alfaph  oncha,  cofdam  onzTLgofa  natma- 
jyiatatP  waxjoluah  von  ganfe  pacath  olnoh  vor  nMquah  loth  adnay  nonfah  oxanfah  Valsnodax 
v'andquefh  Ian  findquat  OX  ardanh  onzabel  ornuich  donquin  ajUnax  arfahels  ontipodah  onivah 
nofch  als  tuaut  quts,  ar  mad  notgals. 

3.  VanxanXquah  ondreb  ah  vrh  quanchah  orn^andvahloh^  audah  ?tol  fan,  fedmah-zvgeh  ah 
nhm\cidim^-ii^e.t  i.rdomfh^  oxah  gethol  val  axel  authaih  gorfan  vax  parfah  vort  lanq  audam- 
ffah  getheolj  urchan  nahadah  oxemhles  armax  loxhaty  vos  antaxby  orfe  vaxy  alnoth,  other  ntals  ol~ 
nah  geXhom  Vardamach,  allfa. 

4.  Orgeth  or  pafquah  omzadahvorts^an'renodahvarfava  oncb  aldumph,  auget  onfavatgalta, 
oXh  arveth  ax  pa  gefne  ovad  ax  orttey  aldiinibigcs,  Vofcomph  aize  ax,  orzad  audah  goji  ajioh 
tiadah  VorteSy  ajiniah  noXefima  gothnuxhad  omza,  gexh  alteXh  ox  degaxh  ouda  voxa  gemnache  ad~ 
iiv  duufa  ah  alii  arfah. 

5.  Orthaxhohgaji  ardoh  ntax  varmahdoxh  novamq  lath^  advat  GoxhatH^  ardrivoh  ajhmagel 
arpageX  ajieth  arde  obza^  oh  (ya")  gem  va  pala  biiiida  orfat  nahah  odmazen  andulphel,  ox  am- 
brajf  h  oxah  geth  nor  uanifah  genok  daqueth  ah  ajina,  oh  xuto'',  alfah  goth  necor  andeoh  neo  al- 
da  nah. 

6.Venlah  oha  demageus  oufanfah^  paphah  olemiieh,  e&adcha  lax  ornah  vor  adnie  ox  Vajlrnah 
grelabazna^gamnacho  ajiniah  ochado  laudridah  V'.m  fah^  liigho  iahat  nabfcham  nohads  vandifpa- 
ro^amod  a-rtdroch  alpoh  zuml loh  afnah  gonfageph  aldeh  to  dah  vax  orb  afnis gad  av  dan  fe  qua^ 
deo,  dath  vax  nogra'r  vox  f  ghat  Mon. 

7.  Ami  olbah  gaLpalohindhd.  gau^nn-iagenCzh  olio  var  fe  d  arfah  goh  0  albvmielamacapa- 
loth  who  nad  veflah  vors  jrdnj  imnony  afqvamraxh  als  vafinah  genda  loggahtih  afimv. 

8.  Amah  notah  lax  van  Ivhoh  d.fniaphi  ol  eapraminacah  oxandahvah  gemveloriphi- 
tonpha  actamplahnoftapha  ormaxadahahar  orzemblizadmah  panchefelogedoli  afchah  ol- 
tnah  ledoh  vaxma. 

9.  Cans  na  C;>p  Ian  feda  ax  nor  vorta  vo.  Las  pral  onfa  gem  gemah  noph  gazo  na  von  faulfa 
milrudg  anf  I  unfa  pah  vort  velfa  or  alda  viax  nor  adroh  femnch  oh  vandefqual  olzah  nolpax  pa- 
hahlqth  r  nx  rv  vanfar  glniinaph gath  ardot  ardri  axa  nob  gaga  leth  arde  maxa. 

10.  CiirfaliMabah  vophch  alps  arfordvord  vanfax  oriox  nabax  gemnepoh  laphet  foda  nax  vsnt- 
lalnams  arfieth  alloah  H'phirt  lauda  noxa  voxtaf  ardno  androch  labvtageth  njfu  almaglo  ardet 
nalbar  vanfe  darXo  vorts  parfun  ur  unrab  vorgadeth  l-.tb  orzenax  vomreb  gelpha,  Icgar  ornem- 
hla  ox  ar  vah  fu. 

11.  Ziinchevmachafeph,  olzaminoah  Valf;;buiaah  nodeliganax  orfapnago  daifagna- 
pha  nobliblitliaimtpyth  arfepolimitautons  Jembiiinimur  leboge  axpar  oniaza  oldaxar- 
dacoah. 

12.  Semno  ah  al  ehi  do  a  cha  da  Selpagmodah  a  da  hu  ba  mi  ca  noh  dam  pha  gli  af  cha 
nor  ox  om  pa  mi  na  pho.  lemp,  na,  gou,  fa,  pha  nc  co  al  pha  af  pa-  ge  mo  cal.  na 
tu  rage. 

13.  Sen  gal  fe  quar  nif  fa  glau  fur  tad  ormaca  oxinodal  ge  brah  nop  tar  na  gel  vom  na 
chef  pal  ma  cax  arfe(i  afdon  fadg  afc  Ian  fau  che  dah  nor  vi  car  max  coh  zmn  bla  xan- 
pha         ad  geh  do  ca  ba  ah. 

14.  Ar  gem  na  e  a  pal  fax,  ocn'idohzh  caf  pigan  alpuh  gagah  loth  zzlCa.  bra  dan  go  fa 
pax  vol  fan quef  tan  o«if<JpW  oj^ic/ii  or  zy  la  pa  a  chra  pa  ma  les  ad  ma  carpah  o;ic(z/pi  on 
da  pa,  gem  na  de  vor  gufe. 

15.  Lax  gaus  fa  par  fat  lajieah  lor  adah  nox  ax  ardephes  mufou  andoh  gvmzi  vor  fab  liboh  ad 
m  C'd^A\oU  gaho  larva  nox  ax  oho  Ian  fynpab  noxuVriah  fepbah  Ittfaz  oldgalfax  notxaph  *x 
vernoc  arpos  arJa  zent  zuhah,  lothor  zm  Ivbab  vom  xa  da  phi  ca  no. 

16.  Afibtaphe  ondah  Vor  ban  fanp'.>ar  pa  loth  agno  jam  nefrob  aw  algors  vrrabah  geitfeh  aide 
ex  nah  vors  purbljx  amphicaf)  nojirohh  admadg  or  napfv  afmo  Ion  gamphi  arbel  nof  amphi  oh 
fembelob  afchi  nar  laffdx  las  doxa  pra  gem  a  fefirox  amphi  nax  var  fenibleh. 

17.  Angefeforcapacdd  onz  adq  ochadah  olzab  vor  nah  orpogographel  al  fa  ^em  na  ca  pi 
coh.  Ul  da  pa  porfah  «<ixor  2/OK/ii  rous  Erbauf  lab  dun  zaph  algadef  loh  gem  vorta  ob 
amph  a.  hoha  za.  vaxorza  lepteh  oxorneoh  ah  va  dv  na  ca.pi  ca  lodox     ardnab. 


Fi:Niis. 


s, 


I 


i 


Ill 


m 


jk' 


■"^^W^- 


4^ 


\.h 


