THE KEY OF SOLOMON THE KING 


(CLAVICULA SALOMONIS) 


by S. LIDDELL MACGREGOR MATHERS 


[1888] 


THE KEY OF 
SOLOMON THE KING 


(CLAVICULA SALOMONIS) 


NOW FIRST TRANSLATED AND EDITED FROM ANCIENT MSS. IN THE BRITISH 
MUSEUM 


BY 


S. LIDDELL MACGREGOR MATHERS 


AUTHOR OF 'THE KABBALAH UNVEILED,' 'THE TAROT,' ETC. 
George Redway, London 


[1888] 


Scanned at sacred-texts.com, July 2000.J. B. Hare, redactor.Reformatted August 2003. This text is in the public domain. These files may be used 
for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is preserved intact 


figure 2. 


KEY OF SOLOMON THE KING 
PREFACE 


IN presenting this celebrated magical work to the student of occult science some few prefatory 
remarks are necessary. 


The Key of Solomon, save for a curtailed and incomplete copy published in France in the 
seventeenth century, has never yet been printed, but has for centuries remained in Manuscript 
form inaccessible to all but the few fortunate scholars to whom the inmost recesses of the great 
libraries were open. I therefore consider that I am highly honoured in being the individual to 
whose lot it has fallen to usher it into the light of day. 


The fountain-head and storehouse of Qabalistical Magic, and the origin of much of the 
Ceremonial Magic of mediaeval times, the 'Key' has been ever valued by occult writers as a work 
of the highest authority; and notably in our own day Eliphaz Lévi has taken it for the model on 
which his celebrated 'Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie' was based. It must be evident to the 
initiated reader of Levi, that the Key of Solomon was his text book of study, and at the end of 
this volume I give a fragment of an ancient Hebrew manuscript of the 'Key of Solomon,’ 
translated and published in the Philosophie Occulte,' as well as an Invocation called the 
'Qabalistical Invocation of Solomon,’ which bears close analogy to one in the First Book, being 
constructed in the same manner on the scheme of the Sephiroth. 


The history of the Hebrew original of the 'Key of Solomon' is given in the Introductions, but 
there is every reason to suppose that this has been entirely lost, and Christian, the pupil of Lévi, 
says as much in his 'Histoire dc la Magie.' 


p. viii 


I see no reason to doubt the tradition which assigns the authorship of the 'Key' to King Solomon, 
for among others Josephus, the Jewish historian, especially mentions the magical works 
attributed to that monarch; this is confirmed by many Eastern traditions, and his magical skill is 
frequently mentioned in the Arabian Nights. 


There are, however, two works on Black Magic, the 'Grimorium Verum,' and the 'Clavicola di 
Salomone ridolta,' which have been attributed to Solomon, and which have been in some cases 
especially mixed up with the present work; but which have nothing really to do therewith; they 
are full of evil magic, and I cannot caution the practical student too strongly against them. 


There is also another work called 'Lemegeton or the Lesser Key of Solomon the King,' which is 
full of seals of various Spirits, and is not the same as the present book, though extremely 
valuable in its own department. 


In editing this volume I have omitted one or two experiments partaking largely of Black Magic, 
and which had evidently been derived from the two Goetic works mentioned above I must 


further caution the practical worker against the use of blood the prayer, the pentacle, and the 
perfumes, rightly used, are sufficient and the former verges dangerously on the evil path. Let him 
who, in spite of the warnings of this volume determines to work evil, be assured that that evil 
will recoil on himself and that he will be struck by the reflex current. 


This work is edited from several ancient MSS. in the British Museum, which all differ from each 
other in various points, some giving what is omitted by the others, but all unfortunately agreeing 
in one thing, which is the execrable mangling of the Hebrew words through the ignorance of the 
transcribers. But it is in the Pentacles that the Hebrew is worst, the letters being so vilely 
scribbled as to be actually undecipherable in some instances, and it has been part of my work for 
several years to correct and reinstate the proper Hebrew and Magical characters in the Pentacles. 
The student may therefore safely rely on their being now as nearly correct in their present 
reproduction as it is possible for them to be. I have therefore, wherever I could, corrected the 
Hebrew of the Magical Names in the Conjurations and Pentacles; and in the few instances where 
it was not possible- to do so, I have put them in the most usual form; carefully collating 
throughout one MS. with another. The Chapters are a 


p. ix 


little differently classed in the various MSS., in some instances the matter contained in them 
being transposed, etc. I have added notes wherever necessary. 


The MSS. from which this work is edited are:--Add. MSS., 10,862; Sloane MSS., 1307 and 
3091; Harleian MSS., 3981; King's MSS., 288; and Lansdowne MSS., 1202 and 1203; seven 
codices in all. 


Of all these 10,862 Add. MSS. is the oldest, its date being about the end of the sixteenth century; 
3981 Harleian is probably about the middle of the seventeenth century; the others of rather later 
date. 


Add. MSS. 10,862 is written in contracted Latin, and is hard to read, but it contains Chapters 
which are omitted in the others and also an important Introduction. It is more concise in its 
wording. Its title is short, being simply 'The Key of Solomon, translated from the Hebrew 
language into the Latin.' An exact copy of the signature of the writer of this MS. is given in 
Figure 93. The Pentacles are very badly drawn. 


3981 Harleian MSS.; 288 King's MSS.; and 3091 Sloane MSS., are similar, and contain the same 
matter and nearly the same wording; but the latter MS. has many errors of transcription. They are 
all in French. The Conjurations and wording of these are much fuller than in 10,867 Add. MSS. 
and 1202 Lansdowne MSS. The title is 'The Key of Solomon King of the Hebrews, translated 
from the Hebrew Language into Italian by Abraham Colorno, by the order of his most Serene 
Highness of Mantua; and recently put into French.' The Pentacles are much better drawn, are in 
coloured inks, and in the case of 3091 Sloane MSS., gold and silver are employed. 


1307 Sloane MSS. is in Italian; its Title is 'La Clavicola di Salomone Redotta et epilogata nella 
nostra materna lingua del dottissimo Gio Peccatrix.' It is full of Black Magic, and is a jumble of 
the Key of Solomon proper, and the two Black Magic books before mentioned. The Pentacles are 


badly drawn. It, however, gives part of the Introduction to 10,862 Add. MSS., and is the only 
other MS. which does, save the beginning of another Italian version which is bound up with the 
former MS., and bears the title 'Zecorbenei.' 


1202 Lansdowne MSS. is 'The True Keys of King Solomon, by Armadel.' It is beautifully 
written, with painted initial letters, and the Pentacles are carefully drawn in coloured inks. It is 
more concise in style, but omits several Chapters. At the end are some short extracts from the 


p x 


[paragraph continues]|Grimorium Verum with the Seals of evil spirits, which, as they do not belong to the 
'Key of Solomon! proper, I have not given. For the evident classification of the 'Key' is in two 
books and no more. 


1203 Lansdowne MSS. is 'The Veritable Keys of Solomon translated from the Hebrew into the 
Latin language by the Rabbin Abognazar (?Aben Елга). It is in French, exquisitely written in 
printing letters, and the Pentacles are carefully drawn in coloured inks. Though containing 
similar matter to the others, the arrangement is utterly different being all in one book, and not 
even divided into chapters. 


The antiquity of the Planetary sigils is shown by the fact that, among the Gnostic talismans in the 
British Museum, there is a ring of copper with the sigils of Venus, which are exactly the same as 
those given by the mediaeval writers on Magic. 


Where Psalms are referred to I have in all instances given the English and not the Hebrew 
numbering of them. 


In some places I have substituted the word AZOTH for 'Alpha and Omega,’ e.g., on the blade of 
the Knife with the Black Hilt, Figure 62. I may remark that the Magical Sword may, in many 
cases, be used instead of the Knife. 

In conclusion I will only mention, for the benefit of non-Hebraists, that Hebrew is written from 
right to left, and that from the consonantal nature of the Hebrew Alphabet, it will require fewer 


letters than in English to express the same word. 


I take this opportunity of expressing my obligations to Dr. Wynn Westcott for the valuable 
assistance he has given me in the reconstruction of the Hebrew of the Pentacles. 


S. LIDDELL MACGREGOR MATHERS. 


LONDON, October, 1888. 


PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE 


From Lansdowne MSS. 1203, ' 7'he Veritable Clavicles of Solomon, translated from the Hebrew 
into the Latin language by the Rabbi Abognazar.' 1 


EVERY one knoweth in the present day that from time immemorial Solomon possessed 
knowledge inspired by the wise teachings of an angel, to which he appeared so submissive and 
obedient, that in addition to the gift of wisdom, which he demanded, he obtained with profusion 
all the other virtues; which happened in order that knowledge worthy of eternal preservation 
might not be buried with his body. Being, so to speak, near his end, he left to his son Roboam a 
Testament which should contain all (the Wisdom) he had possessed prior to his death. The 
Rabbins, who were careful to cultivate (the same knowledge) after him, called this Testament the 
Clavicle or Key of Solomon, which they caused to be engraved on (pieces of) the bark of trees, 
while the Pentacles were inscribed in Hebrew letters on plates of copper, so that they might be 
carefully preserved in the Temple which that wise king had caused to be built. 


This Testament was in ancient time translated from the Hebrew into the Latin language by Rabbi 
Abognazar, who transported it with him into the town of Arles in Provence, where by a notable 
piece of good fortune the ancient Hebrew Clavicle, that is to say this precious translation of it, 
fell into the hands of the Archbishop of Arles, after the destruction of the Jews in that city; who, 
from the Latin, translated it into the vulgar tongue, in the same terms which here follow, without 
having either changed or augmented the original translation from the Hebrew. 


Footnotes 


1:1 I fancy this Must be a corruption of 'Aben Ezra.’ 


INTRODUCTION 


From Add. MSS. 10862., 'The Key of Solomon, translated into Latin from the Hebrew idiom. ' 


TREASURE Up, O my son Roboam! the wisdom of my words, seeing that I, Solomon, have 
received it from the Lord. 


Then answered Roboam, and said: How have I deserved to follow the example of my father 
Solomon in such things, who hath been found worthy to receive the knowledge of all living 
things through (the teaching of) an Angel of God? 


And Solomon said: Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings, and learn the wonders of God. For, 
on a certain night, when I laid me down to sleep, I called upon that most holy Name of God, 
IAH, and prayed for the Ineffable Wisdom, and when I was beginning to close mine eyes, the 
Angel of the Lord, even Homadiel, appeared unto me, spake many things courteously unto me, 
and said: Listen, O Solomon! thy prayer before the Most High is not in vain, and since thou hast 
asked neither for long life, nor for much riches, nor for the souls of thine enemies, but hast asked 
for thyself wisdom to perform justice. Thus saith the Lord: According to thy word have I given 
unto thee a wise and understanding heart, so that before thee was none like unto thee, nor ever 
shall arise. 


And when I comprehended the speech which was made unto me, I understood that in me was the 
knowledge of all creatures, both things which are in the heavens and things which are beneath 
the heavens; and I saw that all the writings and wisdom of this present age were vain and futile, 
and that no man was perfect. And I composed a certain work wherein I rehearsed the secret of 
secrets, in which I have preserved them hidden, and I have also therein concealed all secrets 
whatsoever of magical arts of any masters; any secret or experiments, namely, of these sciences 
which is in any way worth being accomplished. Also I have written them in this Key, so that like 
as a key openeth a treasure-house, so this (Key) alone may open the knowledge and 
understanding of magical arts and sciences. 


Therefore, O my son! thou mayest see every experiment of mine or 
p.3 


of others, and let everything be properly prepared for them, as thou shalt see properly set down 
by me, both day and hour, and all things necessary for without this there will be but falsehood 
and vanity in this my work; wherein are hidden all secrets and mysteries which can be 
performed; and that which is (set down) concerning a single divination or a single experiment, 
that same I think concerning all things which are in the Universe, and which have been, and 
which shall be in future time. 


Therefore, O my son Roboam, I command thee by the blessing which thou expectest from thy 
father, that thou shall make an Ivory Casket, and therein place, keep, and hide this my Key; and 
when I shall have passed away unto my fathers, I entreat thee to place the same in my sepulchre 


beside me, lest at another time it might fall into the hands of the wicked. And as Solomon 
commanded, so was it done. 


And when, therefore (men) had waited for a long time, there came unto the Sepulchre certain 
Babylonian Philosophers; and when they had assembled they at once took counsel together that a 
certain number of men should renew the Sepulchre in his (Solomon's) honour; and when the 
Sepulchre was dug out and repaired the Ivory Casket was discovered, and therein was the Key of 
Secrets, which they took with joyful mind, and when they had opened it none among them could 
understand it on account of the obscurity of the words and their occult arrangement, and the 
hidden character of the sense and knowledge, for they were not worthy to possess this treasure. 


Then, therefore, arose one among them, more worthy (than the others), both in the sight of the 
gods, and by reason of his age, who was called Iohé Grevis, 1 and said unto the others: Unless we 
shall come and ask the interpretation from the Lord, with tears and entreaties, we shall never 
arrive at the knowledge of it. 


Therefore, when each of them had retired to his bed, Iohé indeed falling upon his face on the 
earth, began to weep, and striking his breast, said: 


What have I deserved (above others), seeing that so many men can neither understand nor 
interpret this knowledge, even though there were no secret thing in nature which the Lord hath 
hidden from me! Wherefore are these words so obscure? Wherefore am I so ignorant? 


And then on his bended knees, stretching his hands to heaven, he said: 


O God, the Creator of all, Thou Who knowest all things, Who gavest so great Wisdom unto 
Solomon the Son of David the King; grant unto me, I beseech Thee, O Holy Omnipotent and 
Incffable Father, to receive 


p.4 


the virtue of that wisdom, so that I may become worthy by Thine aid to attain unto the 
understanding of this Key of Secrets. 


And immediately there appeared unto me, 1 the Angel of the Lord, saying: 


Do thou remember if the secrets of Solomon appear hidden and obscure unto thee, that the Lord 
hath wished it, so that such wisdom may not fall into the hands of wicked men; wherefore do 
thou promise unto me, that thou art not willing that so great wisdom should ever come to any 
living creature, and that which thou revealest unto any let them know that they must keep it unto 
themselves, otherwise the secrets are profaned and no effect can follow? 


And Iohé answered: I promise unto thee that to none will I reveal (them), save to the honour of 
the Lord, and with much discipline, unto penitent, secret, and faithful (persons). 


Then answered the Angel: Go and read the Key, and its words which were obscure throughout 
shall be manifest unto thee. 


And after this the Angel ascended into Heaven in a Flame of Fire. 


Then Iohé was glad, and labouring with a clear mind, understood that which the Angel of the 
Lord had said, and he saw that the Key of Solomon was changed, so that it appeared quite clear 
unto him plainly in all parts. And Iohé understood that this Work might fall into the hands of the 
ignorant, and he said: I conjure him into whose hands this secret may come, by the Power of the 
Creator, and His Wisdom, that in all things he may, desire, intend and perform, that this Treasure 
may come unto no unworthy (person), nor may he manifest it unto any who is unwise, nor unto 
one who feareth not God. Because if he act otherwise, I pray God that he may never be worthy to 
attain unto the desired effect. 


And so he deposited the Key, which Solomon preserved, in the Ivory Casket. But the Words of 
the Key are as follows, divided into two books, and shown in order. 


Footnotes 


3:1 I think this is correct, but the name is very indistinctly written in the MS., which is difficult 
to decipher. In another copy of the Clavicle it is written Iroe Grecis, but I think this is an error. 


4:1 'Mihi' in MS., probably a slip for ‘unto him,’ 'ei.' 


INTRODUCTION 


From Lansdowne MSS. 1203, 'The Veritable Clavicles of Solomon, translated from the Hebrew 
into the Latin language by the Rabbi Abognazar.' 


O my Son Roboam! seeing that of all Sciences there is none more useful than the knowledge of 
Celestial Movements, I have thought it my duty, being at the point of death, to leave thee an 
inheritance more precious than all the riches which I have enjoyed.’ And in order that thou 
mayest understand how I have arrived at this degree (of wisdom), it is necessary to tell thee that 
one day, when I was meditating upon the power of the Supreme Being, the Angel of the Great 
God appeared before me as I was saying, O how wonderful are the works of God! I suddenly 
beheld, at the end of a thickly-shaded vista of trees, a Light in the form of a blazing Star, which 
said unto me with a voice of thunder: Solomon, Solomon, be not dismayed; the Lord is willing to 
satisfy thy desire by giving thee knowledge of whatsoever thing is most pleasant unto thee. I 
order thee to ask of Him whatsoever thou desirest. Whereupon, recovering from my surprise, I 
answered unto the Angel, that according to the Will of the Lord, I only desired the Gift of 
Wisdom, and by the Grace of God I obtained in addition the enjoyment of all the Celestial 
treasures and the knowledge of all natural things. 


It is by this means, my Son, that I possess all the virtues and riches of which thou now seest me 
in the enjoyment, and in order that thou mayest be willing to be attentive to all which I am about 
to relate to thee, and that thou mayest retain with care all that I am about to tell thee, I assure thee 
that the Graces of the Great God will be familiar unto thee, and that the Celestial and Terrestrial 
Creatures will be obedient unto thee, and a science which only works by the strength and power 
of natural things, and by the pure Angels which govern them. Of which latter I will give thee the 
names in order, their exercises and particular employments to which they are destined, together 
with the days over which they particularly preside, in order that thou mayest arrive at the 
accomplishment of all, which thou wilt find in this my Testament. In all which I promise thee 
success, provided that all thy works only tend unto the honour of God, Who hath given me the 
power to rule, not only over Terrestrial but also over Celestial things, that is to say, over the 
Angels, 


p.6 


of whom I am able to dispose according to my will, and to obtain from them very considerable 
services. 


Firstly. It is necessary for thee to understand that God, having made all things, in order that they 
may be submitted unto Him, hath wished to bring His works to perfection, by making one which 
participates of the Divine and of the Terrestrial, that is to say, Man; whose body is gross and 
terrestrial, while his soul is spiritual and celestial, unto whom He hath made subject the whole 
earth and its inhabitants, and hath given unto Him means by which He may render the Angels 
familiar, as I call those Celestial creatures who are destined: some to regulate the motion of the 
Stars, others to inhabit the Elements, others to aid and direct men, and others again to sing 
continually the praises of the Lord. Thou mayest then, by the use of their seals and characters, 
render them familiar unto thee, provided that thou abusest not this privilege by demanding from 


them things which are contrary to their nature; for accursed be he who will take the Name of God 
in vain, and who will employ for evil purposes the knowledge and good wherewith He hath 
enriched us. 


I command thee, my Son, to carefully engrave in thy memory all that I say unto thee, in order 
that it may never leave thee. If thou dost not intend to use for a good purpose the secrets which I 
here teach thee, I command thee rather to cast this Testament into the fire, than to abuse the 
power thou wilt have of constraining the Spirits, for I warn thee that the beneficent Angels, 
wearied and fatigued by thine illicit demands, would to thy sorrow execute the commands of 
God, as well as to that of all such who, with evil intent, would abuse those secrets which He hath 
given and revealed unto me. Think not, however, O my Son, that it would not be permitted thee 
to profit by the good fortune and happiness which the Divine Spirits can bring thee; on the 
contrary, it gives them great pleasure to render service to Man for whom many of these Spirits 
have great liking and affinity, God having destined them for the preservation and guidance of 
those Terrestrial things which are submitted to the power of Man. 


There are different kinds of Spirits, according to the things over which they preside; some of 
them govern the Empyrean Heaven, others the Primum Mobile, others the First and Second 
Crystalline, others the Starry Heaven there are also Spirits of the Heaven of Saturn, which I call 
Saturnites there are jovial, Martial, Solar, Venerean, Mercurial . and Lunar Spirits there are also 
(Spirits) in the Elements as well as in the Heavens, there are some in the Fiery Region, others in 
the Air, others in the Water, and others upon the Earth, which can all render service to that man 
who shall have the good fortune to understand their nature, and to know how to attract them. 


pe? 


Furthermore, I wish to make thee understand that God hath destined to each one of us a Spirit, 
which watches over us and takes care of our preservation; these are called Genii, who are 
elementary like us, and who are more ready to render service to those whose temperament is 
conformed to the Element which these Genii inhabit; for example, shouldest thou be of a fiery 
temperament, that is to say sanguine, thy genius would be fiery and submitted to the Empire of 
Baél. Besides this, there are special times reserved for the invocation of these Spirits, in the days 
and hours when they have power and absolute empire. It is for this reason that thou wilt see in 
the following tables to what Planet and to what Angel each Day and Hour is submitted, together 
with the Colours which belong unto them, the Metals, Herbs, Plants, Aquatic, Aérial, and 
Terrestrial Animals, and Incense, which are proper to each of them, as also in what quarter of the 
Universe they ask to be invoked. Neither are omitted, the Conjurations, Seals, Characters, and 
Divine Letters, which belong to them, by means of which we receive the power to sympathise 
with these Spirits. 


TABLE OF THE PLANETARY HOURS 


Saturday. 


Sunday. | Monday. | Tuesday. | Wednesday. | Hours from | Hours from | Thursday. | Friday. 
Sunset to Midnight to 
Sunset. Midight. 


Merc. | Jup. Ven. Sat. 8 1 Sun. Moon. | Mars. 
Moon. | Mars. Mer. Jup. 9 Ven. Sat. Sun. 
un. on. п 


ят 
"i 
T 
li 
ИШ 
ИН 
ИШ 
ui 
ii 


ji 

ЦИ 
ШШ 
| 

| 

il 

J 


at. un. oon. | 5 А еп. 
Jup. Ven. Sat. Sun. 6 11 oon. Mars. Mer. 
ars. er. Я 7 


ИШ 
Ш, 
ИН 
i 
Іі 
Іі 
ИШ 
ИШ 


ег. up. en. at. un. oon. ars. 
Moon. | Mars. Mer. Jup. 6 11 Ven. Sat. un. 
Sat. Sun. Moon. Mars. 7 12 Mer. Jup. Ven. 


Table of the Magical Names of the Hours, and of the Angels who rule them, commencing at the 
first hour after Midnight of each day, and ending at the ensuing Midnight. 


Hours. Sunday. | Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. | Thursday. | Friday. Saturday. 
1. Yayn Raphael | Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael 
2. Yanor Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael 
3. Nasnia Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael 

4. Salla Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael 
5. Sadedali | Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel 
6. Thamur | Michael | Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel 
7. Ourer Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zasnael Raphael Sachiel 
8. Thainé Raphael | Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael 
9. Neron Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael 
10. Yayon | Cassiel Michael Gablriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael 
11. Abai Sachiel Anael Caiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael 


12. Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel 
Nathalon 


1. Beron Michael | Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel 

2. Barol Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel 

3. Thanu Raphael | Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael 
4. Athor Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael 
5. Mathon | Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael 

6. Rana Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael 
7. Netos Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel 
8. Tafrac Michael | Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel 

9. Sassur Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel 


10. Agla Raphael | Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael 
11. Caéerra | Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael Cassiel Michael 
12. Salam | Cassiel Michael Gabriel Zamael Raphael Sachiel Anael 


Table of the Archangels, Angels, Metals, Days of the Week, and Colours attributed to each 
Planet. 


Days. Saturday. | Thursday. | Tuesday. | Sunday. | Friday. | Wednesday. Monday. 
Archangel | Tzaphqiel | Tzadiqel | Khaniael | Raphael | Haniel | Michael Gabriel 
Angel Cassiel Sachiel Zamael Michael | Anael | Raphael Gabriel 
Planet Saturn Jupiter Mars Sun Venus | Mercury Moon 
Metal Lead Tin Iron Gold Copper | Mercury Silver 


Colour Black Blue Red Yellow | Green | Purple or White 
Mixed 
Colours 


p.9 


NOTE BY EDITOR 


These Tables have been collated and compared with various examples of them both MS. and 
printed. They are to be used thus:--Supposing the student wishes to discover the properties of the 
hour from 12 to 1 O'clock p.m. on a Tuesday, let him look in the 'Table of the Planetary Hours,' 
апа having found the hour marked 1 in the column headed' Hours from Midnight to Midnight,’ 
he will see in the column headed 'Hours from Sunset to Sunset,' on the same line the figure 8, 
showing it to be the eighth hour of the day; and in the column headed Tuesday, the name Mars, 
showing that it is under the dominion of the planet Mars. On consulting the 'Table of the Magical 
Names of the Hours,’ etc., he will find under the number 1, the name Beron, and in the column 
'Tuesday,' the name of the Angel Zamael over against it on the same line, showing that the ruler 
of the hour is the Angel Zamael, and that its Magical Name is Beron. Further, on referring to the 
third Table he will see that Tuesday is under the rule of the planet Mars, whose Archangel is 
Khamael, Angel Zamael, Metal Iron, and Colour Red. Similarly it will be found that the hour 
from 10 to 11 p.m. on Saturday is the sixth hour of the night, under the dominion of the Sun, that 
its Magical Name is Caerra, and that the Angel Michael rules it; while Saturday itself is under 
the dominion of the Archangel Tzaphqiel, of the Angel Cassiel, of the Planet Saturn, and that the 
Metal Lead and the Colour Black are applicable to it. 


The ensuing Text is taken from the following MSS., collated and compared with each other. 


Sloane MSS. 1307; Sloane MSS. 3091; Harleian MSS. 3981; Add.MSS. 10862; King's MSS. 
288; Lansdowne MSS. 1202. 


Extracts have also been made from Lansdowne MSS. 1203, which differs considerably from the 
others in general arrangement, though containing very similar matter. 


In cases where the MSS. varied from each other I have taken the version which seemed most 
likely to be correct, in some cases mentioning the variant readings in footnotes. I have also, 
wherever it was possible to do so, corrected the Hebrew names in the Incantations, for these were 
in some cases so marred as to be hardly recognisable; e.g. Zenard, written for Tzabaoth, etc. 


Book I 


Chapter I. Concerning the Divine Love Which Ought To Precede the Acquisition of This 
Knowledge 

Chapter П. Of the Days, And Hours, And of the Virtues of the Planets 

Chapter Ш.Сопсегпіпо the Arts 

Chapter IV. The Confession To Be Made By the Exorcist 

Chapter V Prayers And Conjurations 

Chapter VI. Stronger And More Potent Conjuration 

Chapter VII. An Extremely Powerful Conjuration 

Chapter VII. Concerning the Medals Or Pentacles, And the Manner of Constructing Them 
Chapter IX. Of the Experiment Concerning Things Stolen, And How It Should Be Performed 
Chapter X. Of the Experiment of Invisibility, And How It Should Be Performed 

Chapter XI. To Hinder A Sportsman From Killing Any Game 

Chapter XII. How To Make the Magic Garters 

Chapter XII. How To Make the Magic Carpet Proper For Interrogating the Intelligences, So As 
To Obtain An Answer Regarding Whatsoever Matter One May Wish To Learn 

Chapter XIV. How To Render Thyself Master of A Treasure Possessed By the Spirits 
Chapter XV. Of the Experiment of Seeking Favour And Love 

Chapter XVI. How Operations of Mockery, Invisibility, And Deceit Should Be Prepared 
Chapter ХУП. How Extraordinary Experiments And Operations Should Be Prepared 
Chapter ХУШ. Concerning the Holy Pentacles Or Medals 


THE KEY OF SOLOMON 


BOOK I 
CHAPTER I 


CONCERNING THE DIVINE LOVE WHICH OUGHT TO 
PRECEDE THE ACQUISITION OF THIS KNOWLEDGE 


SOLOMON, the Son of David, King of Israel, hath said that the beginning of our Key is to fear 
God, to adore Him, to honour Him with contrition of heart, to invoke Him 1 in all matters which 
we wish to undertake, and to operate with very great devotion, for thus God will lead us in the 
right way. When, therefore, thou shalt wish to acquire the knowledge of Magical Arts and 
Sciences, it is necessary to have prepared the order of hours and of days, and of the position of 
the Moon, without the operation of which thou canst effect nothing; but if thou observest them 
with diligence thou mayest easily and thoroughly arrive at the effect and end which thou desirest 


to attain. 


Footnotes 


10:1 1202 Lansdowne MSS. omits the concluding part of this sentence. 


CHAPTER II 


OF THE DAYS, AND HOURS, AND OF THE VIRTUES 
OF THE PLANETS 


WHEN ı thou wishest to make any experiment or operation, thou must first prepare, beforehand, 
all the requisites which thou wilt find described in the following Chapters: observing the days, 
the hours, and the other effects of the Constellations which may be found in this Chapter. 


It is, therefore, advisable to know that the hours of the day and of the night together, are twenty- 
four in number, and that each hour is governed by one of the Seven Planets in regular order, 
commencing at the highest and descending to the lowest. The order of the Planets is as follows: 
ShBThAI, Shabbathai, Saturn; beneath Saturn is TzDQ, Tzedeq, Jupiter; beneath Jupiter is 
MADIM, Маат, Mars; beneath Mars 15 ShMSh, Shemesh, the Sun; beneath the Sun is NVGH, 
Nogah, Venus; beneath Venus is KVKB, Kokav, Mercury; and beneath Mercury is LBNH, 
Levanah, the Moon, which is the lowest of all the Planets. 


It must, therefore, be understood that the Planets have their dominion over the day which 
approacheth nearest unto the name which is given and attributed unto them-viz., over Saturday, 
Saturn; Thursday, Jupiter; Tuesday, Mars; Sunday, the Sun; Friday, Venus; Wednesday, 
Mercury; and Monday, the Moon. 


The rule of the Planets over each hour begins from the dawn at the rising of the Sun on the day 
which takes its name from such Planet, and the Planet which follows it in order, succeeds to the 
rule over the next hour. Thus (on Saturday) Saturn rules the first hour, Jupiter the second, Mars 
the third, the Sun the fourth, Venus the fifth, Mercury the sixth, the Moon the seventh, and 
Saturn returns in the rule over the eighth, and the others in their turn, the Planets always keeping 
the same relative order. 


Note that each experiment or magical operation should be performed under the Planet, and 
usually in the hour, which refers to the same. For example:-- 


p. 12 


In the Days and Hours of Saturn thou canst perform experiments to summon the Souls from 
Hades, but only of those who have died a natural death. Similarly on these days and hours thou 
canst operate to bring either good or bad fortune to buildings; to have familiar Spirits attend thee 
in sleep; to cause good or ill success to business, possessions, goods, seeds, fruits, and similar 
things, in order to acquire learning; to bring destruction and to give death, and to sow hatred and 
discord. 


The Days and Hours of Jupiter are proper for obtaining honours, acquiring riches; contracting 
friendships, preserving health; and arriving at all that thou canst desire. 


In the Days and Hours of Mars thou canst make experiments regarding War; to arrive at military 
honour; to acquire courage; to overthrow enemies; and further to cause ruin, slaughter, cruelty, 
discord; to wound and to give death. 


The Days and Hours of the Sun are very good for perfecting experiments regarding temporal 
wealth, hope, gain, fortune, divination, the favour of princes, to dissolve hostile feeling, and to 
make friends. 


The Days and Hours of Venus are good for forming friendships; for kindness and love; for 
joyous and pleasant undertakings, and for travelling. 


The Days and Hours of Mercury are good to operate for eloquence and intelligence; promptitude 
in business; science and divination; wonders; apparitions; and answers regarding the future. 
Thou canst also operate under this Planet for thefts; writings; deceit; and merchandise. 


The Days and Hours of the Moon are good for embassies; voyages envoys; messages; 
navigation; reconciliation; love; and the acquisition of merchandise by water. 1 


Thou shouldest take care punctually to observe all the instructions contained in this chapter, if 
thou desirest to succeed, seeing that the truth of Magical Science dependeth thereon. 


The Hours of Saturn, of Mars, and of the Moon are alike good for communicating and speaking 
with Spirits; as those of Mercury are for recovering thefts by the means of Spirits. 


The Hours of Mars serve for summoning Souls from Hades, 2 especially of those slain in battle. 


The Hours of the Sun, of Jupiter, and of Venus, are adapted for preparing any operations 
whatsoever of love, of kindness, and of invisibility, as is hereafter more fully shown, to which 
must be added other things of a similar nature which are contained in our work. 


p. 13 


The Hours of Saturn and Mars and also the days on which the Moon is conjunct 1 with them, or 
when she receives their opposition or quartile aspect, are excellent for making experiments of 
hatred, enmity, quarrel, and discord; and other operations of the same kind which are given later 
on in this work. 


The Hours of Mercury are good for undertaking experiments relating to games, raillery, jests, 
sports, and the like. 


The Hours of the Sun, of Jupiter, and of Venus, particularly on the days which they rule, are 
good for all extraordinary, uncommon, and unknown operations. 


The Hours of the Moon are proper for making trial of experiments relating to recovery of stolen 
property, for obtaining nocturnal visions, for summoning Spirits in sleep, and for preparing 
anything relating to Water. 


The Hours of Venus are furthermore useful for lots, poisons, all things of the nature of Venus, 
for preparing powders provocative of madness and the like things. 


But in order to thoroughly effect the operations of this Art, thou shouldest perform them not only 
on the Hours but on the Days of the Planets as well, because then the experiment will always 
succeed better, provided thou observest the rules laid down later on, for if thou omittest one 
single condition thou wilt never arrive at the accomplishment of the Art. 


For those matters then which appertain unto the Moon, such as the Invocation of Spirits, the 
Works of Necromancy, and the recovery of stolen property, it is necessary that the Moon should 
be in a Terrestrial Sign, viz.:--Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn. 


For love, grace, and invisibility, the Moon should be in a Fiery Sign, viz.:--Aries, Leo, or 
Sagittarius. 


For hatred, discord, and destruction, the Moon should be in a Watery Sign, viz.:--Cancer, 
Scorpio, or Pisces. 


For experiments of a peculiar nature, which cannot be classed under any certain head, the Moon 
should be in an Airy Sign, viz.:--Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius. 


But if these things seem unto thee difficult to accomplish, it will suffice thee merely to notice the 
Moon after her combustion, or conjunction with the Sun, especially just when she 2 quits his 
beams and appeareth visible. For then it is good to make all experiments for the construction and 
operation of any matter. That is why the time from the New unto the Full Moon is proper for 
performing any of the experiments of which 


p. 14 


we have spoken above. But in her decrease or wane it is good for War, Disturbance, and Discord. 
Likewise the period when she is almost deprived of light, is proper for experiments of 
invisibility, and of Death. 


But observe inviolably that thou commence nothing while the Moon is in conjunction with the 
Sun, seeing that this is extremely unfortunate, and that thou wilt then be able to effect nothing; 
but the Moon quitting his beams and increasing in Light, thou canst perform all that thou 
desirest, observing nevertheless the directions in this Chapter. 


Furthermore, if thou wishest to converse with Spirits it should be especially on the day of 
Mercury and in his hour, and let the Moon be in an Airy Sign, 1 as well as the Sun. 


Retire 2 thou then unto a secret place, where no one may be able to see thee or to hinder thee, 
before the completion of the experiment, whether thou shouldest wish to work by day or by 
night. But if thou shouldest wish to work by night, perfect thy work on the succeeding night; if 
by day, seeing that the day beginneth with the rising of the Sun (perfect thy work on) the 
succeeding day. But the Hour of Inception is the Hour of Mercury. 


Verily, since no experiments for converse with Spirits can be done without a Circle being 
prepared, whatsoever experiments therefore thou wishest to undertake for conversing with 
Spirits, therein thou must learn to construct a certain particular Circle; that being done surround 
that Circle with a Circle of Art for better caution and efficacy. 


Footnotes 
1:1This first paragraph is omitted in 1307 Sloane MSS., and in 10862 Add. MSS. 


12:1Much of these foregoing instructions is omitted in the 10862 Add. MSS., but given in a 
different way in the ensuing paragraphs. 


12:2 In the French 'des Enfers,' in the Latin Inferis.' 


13:1 Conjunction means being in the same degree of the Zodiac; opposition is being 180 degrees, 
and quartile 90 degrees apart from each other. 


— 


3:2i.e. New Moon. 


14:1In Add. MSS. 10862; 'or in an Earthy Sign, as hath been before said.' 


14:2The following paragraphs to the end of this Chapter are only found in the Latin version, 
Add. MSS. 10862. 


CHAPTER III 
CONCERNING THE ARTS 


IF thou wishest to succeed, it is necessary to make the following Experiments and Arts in the 
appropriate Days and Hours, with the requisite solemnities and ceremonies contained and laid 
down in the following Chapters. 


Experiments, then, are of two kinds; the first is to make trial of what, as I have said, can be easily 
performed without a Circle, and in this case it is not necessary to observe anything but what thou 
wilt find in the proper Chapters. The second can in no way be brought to perfection without the 
Circle; and in order to accomplish this perfectly it is necessary to take note of all the preparations 
which the Master of the Art and his Disciples must undertake before constructing 1 the Circle. 


Before commencing operations both the Master and his Disciples must abstain with great and 
thorough continence during the space of nine days from sensual pleasures and from vain and 
foolish conversation; as plainly appeareth in the Second Book, Chapter 4. Six of these nine days 
having expired, he must recite frequently the Prayer and Confession as will be told him; and on 
the Seventh Day, the Master being alone, let him enter into a secret place, let him take off his 
clothes, and bathe himself from head to foot in consecrated and exorcised Water, saying devoutly 
and humbly the prayer, 'О Lord Adonai,' etc., as it is written in the Second Book, Chapter 2. 


The Prayer being finished, let the Master quit the water, and put upon his flesh raiment of white 
linen clean and unsoiled; and then let him go with his Disciples unto a secret place and command 
them to strip themselves naked; and they having taken off their clothes, let him take exorcised 
water and pour it upon their heads so that it flows down to their feet and bathes them completely; 
and while pouring this water upon them let the Master say:--'Be ye regenerate, renewed, washed, 
and рше, etc., as in Book II., Chapter 3. 


Which 2 being done, the Disciples must clothe themselves, putting 


p. 16 


upon their flesh, like their Master, raiment of white linen clean and unsoiled; and the three last 
days the Master and his Disciples should fast, observing the solemnities and prayers marked in 
Book II., Chapter 2. 


Note that the three last days should be calm weather, without wind, and without clouds rushing 
hither and thither over the face of the sky. On the last day let the Master go with his Disciples 
unto a secret fountain of running water, or unto a flowing stream, and there let each of them, 
taking off his clothes, wash himself with due solemnity, as is rehearsed in Book II. And when 
they are clean and pure, let each put upon him garments of white linen, pure, and clean, using the 
prayers and ceremonies described in Book II. After which let the Master alone say the 
confession. The which being finished, the Master in sign of penitence will Kiss 1 the Disciples on 
the forehead, and each of them will Kiss the other. Afterwards let the Master extend his hands 
over the Disciples, and in sign of absolution absolve and bless them; which being done he will 


distribute to each of his Disciples the Instruments necessary for Magical Art, which he is to carry 
into the Circle. 


The First Disciple will bear the Censer, the Perfumes and the Spices the Second Disciple will 
bear the Book, Papers, Pens, Ink, and any stinking or impure materials; the Third will carry the 
Knife and the Sickle of Magical Art, the Lantern, and the Candles; the Fourth, the Psalms, and 
the rest of the Instruments; the Fifth, the Crucible or Chafing-dish, and the Charcoal or Fuel; but 
it is necessary for the Master himself to carry in his hand the Staff, and the Wand or Rod. The 
things necessary being thus disposed, the Master will go with his Disciples unto the assigned 
place, where they have proposed to construct the Circle for the Magical Arts and experiments; 
repeating on the way the prayers and orations which thou wilt find in Book П. 


When the Master shall have arrived at the place appointed, together with his Disciples, he having 
lighted the flame of the fire, and having exorcised it afresh as is laid down in the Second Book, 
shall light the Candle and place it in the Lantern, which one of the Disciples is to hold ever in his 
hand to light the Master at his work. Now the Master of the Art, every time that he shall have 
occasion for some particular purpose to speak with the Spirits, must endeavour to form certain 
Circles which shall differ somewhat, and shall have some particular reference to the particular 
experiment under consideration. Now, in order to succeed in forming such a Circle concerning 
Magical Art, for the greater assurance and efficacy thou shalt construct it in the following 
manner:-- 


p. 17 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE CIRCLE. 


Take thou the Knife, the Sickle, or the Sword of Magical Art consecrated after the manner and 
order which we shall deliver unto thee in the Second Book. With this Knife or with the Sickle of 
Art thou shalt describe, beyond the inner Circle which thou shalt have already formed, a Second 
Circle, encompassing the other at the distance of one foot therefrom and having the same 

centre. 1 Within this space of a foot in breadth between the first and the second circumferential 2 
line, thou shalt trace towards the Four Quarters of the Earth, 3 the Sacred and Venerable Symbols 
of the holy Letter Tau 4. And between the first and the second Circle, s which thou shalt thyself 
have drawn with the Instrument of Magical Art, thou shalt make four hexagonal pentacles, « and 
between these thou shalt write four terrible and tremendous Names of God, viz.:-- 


Between the East and the South the Supreme Name IHVH, Tetragrammaton;-- 
Between the South and the West the Essential Tetragrammatic Name AHIH, Eheieh;-- 
Between the West and the North the Name of Power ALIVN, Elion;-- 

And between the North and the East the Great Name ALH, Eloah;-- 


Which Names are of supreme importance in the list of the Sephiroth, 7 and their Sovereign 
Equivalents. 


Furthermore, thou shalt circumscribe about these Circles two Squares, the Angles of which shall 
be turned towards the Four Quarters of the Earth; and the space between the Lines of the Outer 
and Inner Square shall be half-a-foot. The extreme Angles of the Outer Square shall be made the 
Centres of four Circles, the measure or diameter of which shall be one foot. All these are to be 
drawn with the Knife or consecrated Instrument of Art. And within these Four Circles 


p. 18 

thou must write these four Names of God the Most Holy One, in this order:-- 
At ı the East, AL, El; 

At the West, IH, Yah; 

At the South, AGLA, Agla; 

And at the North ADNI, Adonai. 


Between the two Squares the Name Tetragrammaton is to be written in the same way as is shown 
in the plate. (See Figure 2.) 


While constructing the Circle, the Master should recite the following Psalms:--Psalm ii.; Psalm 
liv.; Psalm cxiii.; Psalm Ixvii.; Psalm xlvii.; Psalm Ixviii. 


Or he may as well recite them before tracing the Circle. 


The which being finished, and the fumigations being performed, as is described in the chapter on 
Fumigations in the Second Book, the Master should reassemble his Disciples, encourage them, 
reassure them, fortify them, and conduct them into the parts of the Circle of Art, where he must 
place them in the four quarters of the earth, encourage them, and exhort them to fear nothing, and 
to keep in the places assigned to them. Also, the Disciple who is placed towards the East should 
have a pen, ink, paper, silk, and white cotton, all clean and suitable for the work. Furthermore, 
each of the Companions should have a new Sword drawn in his hand (besides the consecrated 
Magical Sword of Art), and he should keep his hand resting upon the hilt thereof, and he should 
on no pretext quit the place assigned to him, nor move therefrom. 


After this the Master should quit the Circle, light the fuel in the earthen pots, and place upon 
them the Censers, in the Four Quarters of the Earth; and he should have in his hand the 
consecrated taper of wax, and he should light it and place it in a hidden and secret place prepared 
for it. Let him after this re-enter and close the Circle. 


The Master should afresh exhort his Disciples, and explain to them all that they have to do and to 
observe; the which commands they should promise and vow to execute. 


Let the Master then repeat this Prayer:-- 


PRAYER. 


When we enter herein with all humility, let God the Almighty One enter into this Circle, by the 
entrance of an eternal happiness, of a Divine prosperity, of a perfect joy, of an abundant charity, 
and of an eternal salutation. Let all the demons fly from this place, especially those who are 
opposed unto this work, and let the Angels of Peace assist and protect 


p. 19 


this Circle, from which let discord and strife fly and depart. Magnify and extend upon us, O 
Lord, Thy most Holy Name, and bless our conversation and our assembly. Sanctify, O Lord our 
God, our humble entry herein, Thou the Blessed and Holy One of the Eternal Ages! Amen. 


After this, let the Master say upon his knees, as follows:-- 


PRAYER. 


О Lord God, All Powerful and All Merciful, Thou Who desirest not the death of a sinner, but 
rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; give and grant unto us Thy grace, by 
blessing and consecrating this earth and this circle, which is here marked out with the most 
powerful and holy names of God. And thee, I conjure, O Earth, by the Most Holy Name of 
ASHER EHEIEH entering within this Circle, composed and made with mine hand. And may 
God, even ADONAI, bless this place with all the virtues of Heaven, so that no obscene or 
unclean spirit may have the power to enter into this Circle, or to annoy any person who is 
therein; through the Lord God ADONAI, Who liveth eternally unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


I beseech Thee, O Lord God, the All Powerful and the All Merciful, that Thou wilt deign to bless 
this Circle, and all this place, and all those who are therein, and that Thou wilt grant unto us, who 
serve Thee, and rehearse nothing but the wonders of Thy law, a good Angel for our Guardian; 
remove from us every adverse power; preserve us from evil and from trouble; grant, O Lord, that 
we may rest in this place in all safety, through Thee, O Lord, Who livest and reignest unto the 
Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


Let the Master now arise and place upon his head a Crown made of paper (or any other 
appropriate substance), on the which there must be written (with the Colours and other necessary 
things which we shall describe hereafter), these four Names AGLA, AGLAI, AGLATA, 
AGLATAIT. The which Names аге to be placed in the front, behind, and on either side of the 
head. 


Furthermore, the Master ought to have with him in the Circle those Pentacles or Medals which 
are necessary to his purpose, which are described hereinafter, and which should be constructed 
according to the rules given in the Chapter on Pentacles. They should be described on virgin 
paper with a pen; and ink, blood, or colours, prepared according to the manner which we shall 
hereafter show in the Chapters on these subjects. It win be sufficient to take only those Pentacles 
which are actually required, they should be sewed to the front of the linen robe, on the chest, 
with the consecrated needle of the Art, and with a thread which has been woven by a young girl. 


p. 20 


After this, let the Master turn himself towards the Eastern Quarter (unless directed to the 
contrary, or unless he should be wishing to call Spirits which belong to another quarter of the 
Universe), and pronounce with a loud voice the Conjuration contained in this Chapter. And if the 
Spirits be disobedient and do not then make their appearance, he must arise and take the 
exorcised Knife of Art wherewith he hath constructed the Circle, and raise it towards the sky as 
if he wished to beat or strike the Air, and conjure the Spirits. Let him then lay his right hand and 
the Knife upon the Pentacles or Medals, constructed of, and described upon virgin paper, which 
are fastened to or sewn upon his breast, and let him repeat the following Conjuration upon his 
knees:-- 


CONJURATION. 


O Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto Thee. O Lord God Almighty, Who has 
reigned before the beginning of the Ages, and Who by Thine Infinite Wisdom hast created the 
heavens, the earth, and the sea, and all that in them is, all that is visible, and all that is invisible 
by a single word; I praise Thee, I bless Thee, I adore Thee, I glorify Thee, and I pray Thee now 
at the present time to be merciful unto me, a miserable sinner, for I am the work of Thine hands. 
Save me, and direct me by Thy Holy Name, Thou to Whom nothing is difficult, nothing is 
impossible; and deliver me from the night of mine ignorance, and enable me to go forth 
therefrom. Enlighten me with a spark of Thine Infinite Wisdom. Take away from my senses the 
desire of covetousness, and the iniquity of mine idle words. Give unto me, Thy servant, a wise 
understanding) penetrating and subtle heart, to acquire and comprehend all Sciences and Arts; 
give unto me capacity to hear, and strength of memory to retain them, so that I may be able to 
accomplish my desires, and understand and learn all difficult and desirable Sciences; and also 
that I may be able to comprehend the hidden secrets of the Holy Writings. Give me the virtue to 
conceive them, so that I may be able to bring forth and pronounce my words with patience and 
humility, for the instruction of others, as Thou hast ordered me. 


O God, the Father, All Powerful and All Merciful, Who hast created all things, Who knowest and 
conceivest them universally, and to Whom nothing is hidden, nothing is impossible; I entreat 
Thy Grace for me and for Thy servants, because Thou seest and knowest well that we perform 
not this work to tempt Thy Strength and Thy Power as if in doubt thereof, but rather that we may 
know and understand the truth of all hidden things. I beseech Thee to have the kindness to be 
favourable unto us; by Thy Splendour, Thy Magnificence, and Thy Holiness, and by Thy Holy, 
Terrible, and Ineffable Name ТАН, at which the whole world doth 


p. 21 


tremble, and by the Fear with which all creatures obey Thee. Grant, O Lord, that we may become 
responsive unto Thy Grace, so that through it we may have a full confidence in and knowledge 
of Thee, and that the Spirits may discover themselves here in our presence, and that those which 
are gentle and peaceable may come unto us, so that they may be obedient unto Thy commands, 
through Thee, О Most Holy ADONAI, Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and Whose 
Empire endureth unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


After having said all these words devoutly, let the Master arise, and place his hands upon the 
Pentacles, and let one of the Companions hold the Book open before the Master, who, raising his 
eyes to heaven, and turning unto the Four Quarters of the Universe, shall say:-- 


O Lord, be Thou unto me a Tower of Strength against the appearance and assaults of the Evil 
Spirits. 


After this, turning towards the Four Quarters of the Universe, he shall say the following words:-- 


These be the Symbols and the Names of the Creator, which can bring Terror and Fear unto you. 
Obey me then, by the power of these Holy Names, and by these Mysterious Symbols of the 
Secret of Secrets. 


The which being said and done, thou shalt see them draw near and approach from all parts. But if 
they be hindered, detained, or occupied in some way, and so that they cannot come, or if they are 
unwilling to come, then, the Suffumigations and Censings being performed anew, and (the 
Disciples) having anew, by especial order, touched their Swords, and the Master having 
encouraged his Disciples, he shall reform the Circle with the Knife of Art, and, raising the said 
Knife towards the Sky, he shall as it were strike the air therewith. After this he shall lay his hand 
upon the Pentacles, and having bent his knees before the Most High, he shall repeat with 
humility the following Confession; the which his Disciples shall also do, and they shall recite it 
in a low and humble voice, so that they can scarcely be heard. 1 


Footnotes 


15:1 Sloane MSS. 3091 says, "before they come to the Circle.' 


— 


5:2This paragraph is omitted in Lansdowne MSS. 1202. 


6:1 Note the 'holy kiss ' in the New Testament. 'Greet ye one another with a holy kiss.' 


— 


— 


7:li.e. two Circles enclosed between three circumferential lines. 


— 


7:2i.e. within the first Circle. 


— 


7:3i.e. the four Cardinal points of the compass. 


17:4The letter Tau represents the Cross, and in 10862 Add. MSS. in the drawing of the Circle, 
the Hebrew letter is replaced by the Cross; in 1307 Sloane MSS. by the T or Tau-Cross. 


— 


:Si.e. in the Outer Circle, bounded by the second and third circumferential lines. 


17:6 10862 Add. NISS. is the only copy which uses the word hexagonal, but the others show 
four hexagrams in the drawing; in the drawing, however, 10862 gives the hexagrams formed by 
various differing interlacements of two triangles, as shown in Figure 2. 


17:7 The Sephiroth are the ten Qabalistical Emanations of the Deity. The Sovereign Equivalents 
are the Divine Names referred thereto. See my 'Kabbalah Unveiled.' 


18:1 The MSS. vary as to the point whereat each Name is to be placed, but I think the above will 
be found to answer. 


1:1So as not to interfere with the direction of the Will-currents of the Master. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE CONFESSION TO BE MADE BY THE EXORCIST 


CONFESSION. 


O LORD of Heaven and of Earth, before Thee do I confess my sins, and lament them, cast down 
and humbled in Thy presence. For I have sinned before Thee by pride, avarice, and boundless 
desire of honours and riches; by idleness, gluttony, greed, debauchery, and drunkenness; because 
I have offended Thee by all kinds of sins of the flesh, adulteries, and pollutions, which I have 
committed myself, and consented that others should commit; by sacrilege, thefts, rapine, 
violation, and homicide; by the evil use I have made of my possessions, by my prodigality, by 
the sins which I have committed against Hope and Charity, by my evil advice, flatteries, bribes, 
and the ill distribution which I have made of the goods of which I have been possessed; by 
repulsing and maltreating the poor, in the distribution which I have made of the goods committed 
to my charge, by afflicting those over whom I have been set in authority, by not visiting the 
prisoners, by depriving the dead of burial, by not receiving the poor, by neither feeding the 
hungry nor giving drink to the thirsty, by never keeping the Sabbath and the other feasts, by not 
living chastely and piously on those days, by the easy consent which I have given to those who 
incited me to evil deeds, by injuring instead of aiding those who demanded help from me, by 
refusing to give ear unto the cry of the poor, by not respecting the aged, by not keeping my word, 
by disobedience to my parents, by ingratitude towards those from whom I have received 
kindness, by indulgence in sensual pleasures, by irreverent behaviour in the Temple of God, by 
unseemly gestures thereat, by entering therein without reverence, by vain and unprofitable 
discourse when there, by despising the sacred vessels of the temple, by turning the holy 
Ceremonies into ridicule, by touching and eating the sacred bread with impure lips and with 
profane hands, and by the neglect of my prayers and adorations. 


I detest also the crimes which I have committed by evil thoughts, vain and impure meditations, 
false suspicions, and rash judgments; by 


p.23 


the evil consent which I have readily given unto the advice of the wicked, by lust of impure and 
sensual pleasures; by my idle words, my lies, and my deceit; by my false vows in various ways; 
and by my continual slander and calumny. 


I detest also the crimes which I have committed within; the treachery and discord which I have 
incited; my curiosity, greed, false speaking, violence, malediction, murmurs, blasphemies, vain 
words, insults, dissimulations; my sins against God by the transgression of the ten 
commandments, by neglect of my duties and obligations, and by want of love towards God and 
towards my neighbour. 


Furthermore, I hate the sins which I have committed in all my senses, by sight, by hearing, by 
taste, by smell, and by touch, in every way that human weakness can offend the Creator; by my 
carnal thoughts, deeds, and meditations. 


In which I humbly confess that I have sinned, and recognise myself as being in the sight of God 
the most criminal of all men. 


I accuse myself before Thee, O God, and I adore Thee with all humility. O ye, Holy Angels, and 
ye, Children of God, in your presence I publish my sins, so that mine Enemy may have no 
advantage over me, and may not be able to reproach me at the last day; that he may not be able to 
say that I have concealed my sins, and that 1 be not then accused in the presence of the Lord; but, 
on the contrary, that on my account there may be joy in Heaven, as over the just who have 
confessed their sins in thy presence. 


O Most Mighty and All Powerful Father, grant through Thine unbounded Mercy that I may both 
see and know all the Spirits which I invoke, so that by their means I may see my will and desire 
accomplished, by Thy Sovereign grandeur, and by Thine Ineffable and Eternal Glory, Thou Who 
art and Who wilt be for ever the Pure and Ineffable Father of All. 


The Confession having been finished with great humility, and with the inward feeling of the 
heart, the Master will recite the following prayer:-- 


PRAYER. 


O Lord All Powerful, Eternal God and Father of all Creatures, shed upon me the Divine 
Influence of Thy Mercy, for I am Thy Creature. I beseech Thee to defend me from mine 
Enemies, and to confirm in me true and steadfast faith. 


O Lord, I commit my Body and my Soul unto Thee, seeing I put my trust in none beside Thee; it 
is on Thee alone that I rely; O Lord my God aid me; O Lord hear me in the day and hour wherein 
I shall invoke 


p. 24 


[paragraph continues] Thee. I pray Thee by Thy Mercy not to put me in oblivion, nor to remove me from 
Thee. O Lord be Thou my succour, Thou Who art the God of my salvation. O Lord make me a 
new heart according unto Thy loving Kindness. These, O Lord, are the gifts which I await from 
Thee, O my God and my Master, Thou Who livest and reignest unto the Ages of the Ages. 
Amen. 


O Lord God the All Powerful One, Who hast formed unto Thyself great and Ineffable Wisdom, 
and Co-eternal with Thyself before the countless Ages; Thou Who in the Birth of Time hast 
created the Heavens, and the Earth, the Sea, and things that they contain; Thou Who hast vivified 
all things by the Breath of Thy Mouth, I praise Thee, I bless Thee, I adore Thee, and I glorify 
Thee. Be Thou propitious unto me who am but a miserable sinner, and despise me not; save me 
and succour me) even me the work of Thine hands. I conjure and entreat Thee by Thy Holy 
Name to banish from my Spirit the darkness of Ignorance, and to enlighten me with the Fire of 
Thy Wisdom; take away from me all evil desires, and let not my speech be as that of the foolish. 
O Thou, God the Living One, Whose Glory, Honour, and Kingdom shall extend unto the Ages of 
the Ages. Amen. 


CHAPTER V 
PRAYERS AND CONJURATIONS 


PRAYER. 


O LORD God, Holy Father, Almighty and Merciful One, Who hast created all things, Who 
knowest all things and can do all things, from Whom nothing is hidden, to Whom nothing is 
impossible; Thou Who knowest that we perform not these ceremonies to tempt Thy power, but 
that we may penetrate into the knowledge of hidden things; we pray Thee by Thy Sacred Mercy 
to cause and to permit that we may arrive at this understanding of secret things, of whatever 
nature they may be, by Thine aid, O Most Holy ADONAI, Whose Kingdom and Power shall 
have no end unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


The Prayer being finished, let the Exorcist lay his hand upon the Pentacles, while one of the 
Disciples shall hold open before him the Book wherein are written the prayers and conjurations 
proper for conquering, subduing, and reproving the Spirits. Then the Master, turning towards 
each Quarter of the Earth, and raising his eyes to Heaven, shall say: 


O Lord, be Thou unto me a strong tower of refuge, from the sight and assaults of the Evil Spirits. 


After which let him turn again towards the Four Quarters of the Earth, and towards each let him 
utter the following words: 


Behold the Symbols and Names of the Creator, which give unto ye for ever Terror and Fear. 
Obey then, by the virtue of these Holy Names, and by these Mysteries of Mysteries. 


After this he shall see the Spirits come from every side. But in case they are occupied in some 
other place, or that they cannot come, or that they are unwilling to come: then let him commence 
afresh to invoke them after the following manner, and let the Exorcist be assured that even were 
they bound with chains of iron, and with fire, they could not refrain from coming to accomplish 
his will. 


p. 26 
THE CONJURATION. 1 


O ye Spirits, ye I conjure by the Power, Wisdom, and Virtue of the Spirit of God, by the uncreate 
Divine Knowledge, by the vast Mercy of God, by the Strength of God, by the Greatness of God, 
by the Unity of God; and by the Holy Name of God EHEIEH, which is the root, trunk, source, 
and origin of all the other Divine Names, whence they all draw their life and their virtue, which 
Adam having invoked, he acquired the knowledge of all created things. 


I conjure ye by the Indivisible Name IOD, which marketh and expresseth the Simplicity and the 
Unity of the Nature Divine, which Abel having invoked, he deserved 2 to escape from the hands 
of Cain his brother. 


I conjure ye by the Name TETRAGRAMMATON ELOHIM, which expresseth and signifieth 
the Grandeur of so lofty a Majesty, that Noah having pronounced it, saved himself, and protected 
himself with his whole household from the Waters of the Deluge. 


I conjure ye by the Name of God EL Strong and Wonderful, which denoteth the Mercy and 
Goodness of His Majesty Divine, which Abraham having invoked, he was found worthy to come 
forth from the Ur of the Chaldeans. 


I conjure ye by the most powerful Name of ELOHIM GIBOR, which showeth forth the Strength 
of God, of a God All Powerful, Who punisheth the crimes of the wicked, Who seeketh out and 
chastiseth the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation; 
which Isaac having invoked, he was found worthy to escape from the Sword of Abraham his 
father. 


I conjure ye and I exorcise ye by the most holy Name of ELOAH VA-DAATH, which Jacob 
invoked when in great trouble, and was found worthy to bear the Name of Israel, which 
signifieth Vanquisher of God and he was delivered from the fury of Esau his brother. 


I conjure ye by the most potent Name of EL 3 ADONAI TZABAOTH, which is the God of 
Armies, ruling in the Heavens, which Joseph invoked, and was found worthy to escape from the 
hands of his Brethren. 


I conjure ye by the most potent name of ELOHIM TZABAOTH, which expresscth piety, mercy, 
splendour, and knowledge of God, which Moses 


р. 27 


invoked, and he was found worthy to deliver the People Israel from Egypt, and from the 
servitude of Pharaoh. 


I conjure ye by the most potent Name of SHADDAI, which signifieth doing good unto all; which 
Moses invoked, and having struck the Sea, it divided into two parts in the midst, on the right 
hand and on the left. I conjure ye by the most holy Name of EL 1 CHAT, which is that of the 
Living God, through the virtue of which alliance with us, and redemption for us have been made; 
which Moses invoked and all the waters returned to their prior state and enveloped the 
Egyptians, so that not one of them escaped to carry the news into the Land of Mizraim. 


Lastly, I conjure ye all, ye rebellious Spirits, by the most holy Name of God ADONAI 
MELEKH, which Joshua invoked, and stayed the course of the Sun in his presence, through the 
virtue of Methratton, 2 its principal Image; and by the troops of Angels who cease not to cry day 
and night, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, ADONAI ELOHIM TZABAOTH (that is, 
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of Thy Glory); and by the Ten 
Angels who preside over the Ten Sephiroth, by whom God communicateth and extendeth His 


influence over lower things, which are KETHER, CHOKMAH, BINAH, GEDULAH, 
GEBURAH, TIPHERETH, NETZACH, HOD, YESOD, and MALKUTH. 


I conjure ye anew, O Spirits, by all the Names of God, and by all His marvellous work; by the 
heavens; by the earth; by the sea; by the depth of the Abyss, and by that firmament which the 
very Spirit of God hath moved; by the sun and by the stars; by the waters and by the seas, and all 
which they contain; by the winds, the whirlwinds, and the tempests; by the virtue of all herbs, 
plants, and stones; by all which is in the heavens, upon the earth, and in all the Abysses of the 
Shades. 


I conjure ye anew, and I powerfully urge ye, O Demons, in whatsoever part of the world ye may 
be, so that ye shall be unable to remain in air, fire, water, earth, or in any part of the universe, or 
in any pleasant place which may attract ye; but that ye come promptly to accomplish our desire, 
and all things that we demand from your obedience. 


I conjure ye anew by the two Tables of the Law, by the five books of Moses, by the Seven 
Burning Lamps on the Candlestick of Gold before the face of the Throne of the Majesty of God, 
and by the Holy of Holies wherein the KOHEN HA-GADUL was alone permitted to enter, that 
is to say, the High-Priest. 


I conjure ye by Him Who hath made the heavens and the earth, and Who hath measured those 
heavens in the hollow of His hand, and enclosed 


p. 28 


the earth with three of His fingers, Who is seated upon the Kerubim and upon the Seraphim; and 
by the Kerubim, which is called the Kerub, which God constituted and placed to guard the Tree 
of Life, armed with a flaming sword, after that Man had been driven out of Paradise. 


I conjure ye anew, Apostates from God, by Him Who alone hath performed great wonders; by 
the Heavenly Jerusalem; and by the Most Holy Name of God in Four Letters, and by Him Who 
enlighteneth all things and shineth upon all things by his Venerable and Ineffable Name, 
EHEIEH ASHER EHEIEH; that ye come immediately to execute our desire, whatever it may be. 


I conjure ye, and I command ye absolutely, O Demons, in whatsoever part of the Universe ye 
may be, by the virtue of all these Holy Names:-- 


ADONAI, ı YAH, HOA, EL, ELOHA, ELOHINU, ELOHIM, ЕНЕЕН, МАКОМ, КАРНО, 
ESCH, INNON, AVEN, AGLA, HAZOR, EMETH, YAII, ARARITHA, YOVA, HA-KABIR, 
MESSIACH, ТОМАН, MAL-KA, EREL, KUZU, MATZPATZ, EL SHADDAI; and by all the 
Holy Names of God which have been written with blood in the sign of an eternal alliance. 


I conjure ye anew by these other Names of God, Most Holy and unknown, by the virtue of which 
Names ye tremble every day:--BARUC, 2 BACURABON, PATACEL, ALCHEEGHEL, 
AQUACHAIT, HOMORION, EHEIEH, ABBATON, CHEVON, CEBON, OYZROYMAS, 
CHAI, EHEIEH, ALBAMACHI, ORTAGU, NALE, ABELECH (or HELECH), YEZE (or 
SECHEZZE); that ye come quickly and without any delay into our presence from every quarter 


and every climate of the world wherein ye may be, to execute all that we shall command ye in 
the Great Name of God. 


Footnotes 


26:1There is an Invocation bearing the title of "The Qabalistical Invocation of Solomon,' given by 
Eliphas Lévi, which differs in many points from the one given above, though resembling it in 
some particulars. Lévi's is more evidently constructed on the plan indicated in the 'Siphra 
Dtzenioutha,' C. Ш.; Annotation $5, sub $8, 9; while the one above more follows that laid down, 
ibid. §5, sub §3. I see no reason to suppose that Lévi's is unauthentic. It will be noted by the 
Qabalistical reader, that the above Conjuration rehearses the Divine Names attached to the Ten 
Sephiroth. 


26:2 In the French, 'merita d'échapper.' 


26:3More usually the Name YETRAGAMMATON TZABAOTR is attributed to the Seventh 
Sephira. 


27:1Both this Name and 'Shaddai' are attributed to the Ninth Sephira, and I have therefore put the 
two invocations in the same paragraph. 


27:2 The Archangel, who is called also the Prince of Countenances. 


28:1 I have made these Names as correct as possible; as in all the original MSS. the Hebrew is 
much mutilated. These names are some of them ordinary titles of God; others Magical and 
Qabalistical names compounded from the initials of sentences, etc.; and other permutations of 
other names. 


28:2 I give these Names as they stand, they do not all appear to be Hebrew; some of them 
suggest the style of the barbarous names in the Greeco-Egyptian Magical Papyri. 


CHAPTER VI 


STRONGER AND MORE POTENT CONJURATION 


IF they then immediately appear, it is well; if not, let the Master uncover the consecrated 
Pentacles which he should have made to constrain and command the Spirits, and which he 
should wear fastened round his neck, holding the Medals (or Pentacles) in his left hand, and the 
consecrated Knife in his right; and encouraging his Companions, he shall say with a loud voice:-- 


ADDRESS. 


Here be the Symbols of Secret things, the standards, the ensigns, and the banners, of God the 
Conqueror; and the arms of the Almighty One, to compel the Aerial Potencies. I command ye 
absolutely by their power and virtue that ye come near unto us, into our presence, from 
whatsoever part of the world ye may be in, and that ye delay not to obey us in all things wherein 
we shall command ye by the virtue of God the Mighty One. Come ye promptly, and delay not to 
appear, and answer us with humility. 


If they appear at this time, show them the Pentacles, and receive them with kindness, gentleness, 
and courtesy; reason and speak with them, question them, and ask from them all things which 
thou hast proposed to demand. 


But if, on the contrary, they do not yet make their appearance, holding the consecrated Knife in 
the right hand, and the Pentacles being uncovered by the removal of their consecrated covering, 
strike and beat the air with the Knife as if wishing to commence a combat, comfort and exhort 
thy Companions, and then in a loud and stern voice repeat the following Conjuration:-- 


CONJURATION. 1 


Here again I conjure ye and most urgently command ye; I force, constrain, and exhort ye to the 
utmost, by the most mighty and powerful 


p. 30 


[paragraph continues] Name of God EL, strong and wonderful, and by God the just and Upright, I 
exorcise ye and command ye that ye in no way delay, but that ye come immediately and upon the 
instant hither before us, without noise, deformity, or hideousness, but with all manner of 
gentleness and mildness. 


I exorcise ye anew, and powerfully conjure ye, commanding ye with strength and violence by 
Him Who spake and it was done; and by all these names: EL SHADDAI, ELOHIM, ELOHI, 
TZABAOTH, ELIM, ASHER EHEJEH, YAH, TETRAGRAMMATON, SHADDAI, which 
signify God the High and Almighty, the God of Israel, through Whom undertaking all our 
operations we shall prosper in all the works of our hands, seeing that the Lord is now, always, 
and for ever with us, in our heart and in our lips; and by His Holy Names, and by the virtue of 
the Sovereign God, we shall accomplish all our work. 


Come ye at once without any hideousness or deformity before us, come ye without monstrous 
appearance, in a gracious form or figure. Come ye, for we exorcise ye with the utmost 
vehemence by the Name of IAH and ON, which Adam spake and heard; by the Name EL, which 
Noah heard, and saved himself with all his family from the Deluge; by the Name IOD, which 
Noah heard, and knew God the Almighty One; by the Name AGLA which Jacob heard, and saw 
the Ladder which touched Heaven, and the Angels who ascended and descended upon it, whence 
he called that place the House of God and the Gate of Heaven; and by the Name ELOHIM, and 
in the Name ELOHIM, which Moses named, invoked, and heard in Horeb the Mount of God, 
and he was found worthy to hear Him speak from the Burning Bush; and by the Name AIN 
SOPH, which Aaron heard, and was at once made eloquent, wise, and learned; and by the Name 
TZABAOTH, which Moses named and invoked, and all the ponds and rivers were covered with 
blood throughout the land of Egypt; 1 and by the Name IOD, which Moses named and invoked, 
and striking upon the dust of the earth both men and beasts were struck with disease; 2 and by the 
Name, and in the Name PRIMEUMATON which Moses named and invoked, and there fell a 
great and severe hail throughout all the land of Egypt, destroying the vines, the trees, and the 
woods which were in that country; and by the Name IAPHAR, which Moses heard and invoked, 
and immediately a great pestilence began to appear through all the land of Egypt, striking and 
slaying the asses, the oxen, and the sheep of the Egyptians, so that they all died; and by the Name 
ABADDON which Moses invoked and sprinkled the dust towards heaven, and immediately 
there fell so great rain upon the men, cattle, and flocks, that they all died 


р. 31 


throughout the land of Egypt; апа by the Мате ELION which Moses invoked, and there fell so 
great hail as had never been seen from the beginning of the world unto that time, so that all men, 
and herds, and everything that was in the fields perished and died throughout all the land of 
Egypt. And by the Name ADONAI, which Moses having invoked, there came so great a quantity 
of locusts which appeared in the land of Egypt, that they devoured and swallowed up all that the 
hail had spared; and by the Name of PATHEON, 1 which having invoked, there arose so thick, so 
awful, and so terrible darkness throughout the land of Egypt, during the space of three days and 
three nights, that almost all who were left alive died; and by the Name YESOD, and in the Name 
YESOD, which Moses invoked, and at midnight all the first-born, both of men and of animals, 
died; and by the Name Of YESHIMON, which Moses named and invoked, and the Red Sea 
divided itself and separated in two; and by the Name HESION, which Moses invoked, and all the 
army of Pharaoh was drowned in the waters; and by the Name ANABONA, which Moses having 
heard upon Mount Sinai, he was found worthy to receive and obtain the tables of stone written 
with the finger of God the Creator; and by the Name ERYGION, which Joshua having invoked 
when he fought against the Moabites, he defeated them and gained the victory; and by the Name 
HOA, and in the Name HOA, which David invoked, and he was delivered from the hand of 
Goliath; and by the Name YOD, which Solomon having named and invoked, he was found 
worthy to ask for and to obtain in sleep the Ineffable Wisdom of God; and by the Name YIAI, 
which Solomon having named and invoked, he was found worthy to have power over all the 
Demons, Potencies, Powers, and Virtues of the Air. 


By these, then, and by all the other Names of God Almighty, Holy, Living, and True, we 
powerfully command ye, ye who by your own sin have been cast down from the Empyreal 
Heaven, and from before His Throne; by Him Who hath cast ye down unto the most profound of 


the Abysses of Hell, we command ye boldly and resolutely; and by that terrible Day of the 
Sovereign judgment of God, on which all the dry bones in the earth will arise to hear and listen 
unto the Word of God with their Body, and will present themselves before the face of God 
Almighty; and by that Last Fire which shall consume all things; by the (Crystal) Sea which is 
known unto us, which is before the Face of God; by the indicible and ineffable virtue, force, and 
power of the Creator Himself, by His Almighty power, and by the Light and Flame which 
emanate from His Countenance, and which are before His Face; by the Angelical Powers which 
are in the Heavens, and by the most great Wisdom of 


р: 32 


[paragraph continues] Almighty God; by the Seal of David, by the Ring and Seal of Solomon, which was 
revealed unto him by the Most High and Sovereign Creator; and by the Nine Medals or 
Pentacles, which we have among our Symbols, which proceed and come from Heaven, and are 
among the Mysteries of Mysteries or Secrets of Secrets, which you can also behold in my hand, 
consecrated and exorcised with the due and requisite Ceremonies. By these, then, and by all the 
Secrets which the Almighty encloseth in the Treasures of the Sovereign and Highest Wisdom, by 
His hand, and by His marvellous power; I conjure, force, and exorcise ye that ye come without 
delay to perform in our presence that which we shall command ye. 


I conjure ye anew by that most Holy Name which the whole Universe fears, respects, and 
reveres, which is written by these letters and characters, IOD, HE, VAU, HE; and by the last and 
terrible judgment; by the Seat of BALDACHIA; : and by this Holy Name, YIAI, which Moses 
invoked, and there followed that great judgment of God, when Dathan and Abiram were 
swallowed up in the centre of the earth. Otherwise, if ye contravene and resist us by your 
disobedience unto the virtue and power of this Name ҮТАІ, we curse ye even unto the Depth of 
the Great Abyss, into the which we shall cast, hurl, and bind ye, if ye show yourselves rebellious 
against the Secret of Secrets, and against the Mystery of Mysteries. AMEN, AMEN. FIAT, 
FIAT. 


This Conjuration thou shalt say and perform, turning thyself unto the East, and if they appear 
not, thou shalt repeat it unto the Spirits, turning unto the South, the West, and the North, in 
succession, when thou wilt have repeated it four times. And if they appear not even then, thou 
shalt make the Sign of TAU 2 upon the foreheads of thy companions, and thou shalt say:-- 


CONJURATION. 


Behold anew the Symbol and the Name of a Sovereign and Conquering God, through which all 
the Universe fears, trembles, and shudders, and through the most mysterious words of the Secret 
Mysteries and by their Virtue, Strength, and Power. 


I conjure ye anew, I constrain and command ye with the utmost vehemence and power, by that 
most potent and powerful Name of God, EL, strong and wonderful, by Him Who spake and it 
was done; and by the Name IAH, which Moses heard, and spoke with God; and by the Name 
AGLA, which Joseph invoked, and was delivered out of the hands of his brethren; and by the 
Name VAU, which Abraham heard, and knew God the Almighty One; and by the Name of Four 
Letters, TETRAGRAMMATON, 


p.33 


which Joshua named and invoked, and he was rendered worthy and found deserving to lead the 
Army of Israel into the Promised Land; and by the Name ANABONA, by which God formed 
Man and the whole Universe; and by the Name ARPHETON, ı and in the Name ARPHETON, 
by which the Angels who are destined to that end will summon the Universe, in visible body and 
form, and will assemble (all people) together by the sound of the Trumpet at that terrible and 
awful Day of judgment, when the memory of the wicked and ungodly shall perish; and by the 
Name ADONAI, by which God will judge all human flesh, at Whose voice all men, both good 
and evil, will rise again, and all men and Angels will assemble in the air before the Lord, Who 
will judge and condemn the wicked; and by the Name ONEIPHETON, 2 by which God will 
summon the dead, and raise them up again unto life; and by the Name ELOHIM, and in the 
Name ELOHIM, by which God will disturb and excite tempests throughout all the seas, so that 
they will cast out the fish therefrom, and in one day the third part of men about the sea and the 
rivers shall die; and by the Name ELOHI, 3 and in the Name ELOHI, by which God will dry up 
the sea and the rivers, so that men can go on foot through their channels; and by the Name ON, 
and in the Name ON, by which God will restore and replace the sea, the rivers, the streams, and 
the brooks, in their previous state; and by the Name MESSIACH, 4 and in the Name 
MESSIACH, by which God will make all animals combat together, so that they shall die in a 
single day; and by the Name ARIEL, by which God will destroy in a single day all buildings, so 
that there shall not be left one stone upon another; and by the Name IAHT, s by which God will 
cast one stone upon another, so that all people and nations will fly from the sea-shore, and will 
say unto them cover us and hide us; and by the Name EMANUEL, by which God will perform 
wonders, and the winged creatures and birds of the air shall contend with one another; and by the 
Name ANAEL, « and in the Name ANAEL, by which God will cast down the mountains and fill 
up the valleys, so that the surface of the earth shall be level in all parts; and by the Name 
ZEDEREZA, 7 and in the Name ZEDEREZA, by which God will cause the Sun and Moon to be 
darkened, and the Stars of heaven to fall; and by the Name SEPHERIEL, s by which God will 
come to Universal judgment, 


p. 34 


like a Prince newly crowned entering in triumph into his capital city, girded with a zone of gold, 
and preceded by Angels, and at His aspect all climes and parts of the Universe shall be troubled 
and astonished, and a fire shall go forth before Him, and flames and storms shall surround Him; 
and by the Name Tau, 1 by which God brought the Deluge, and the waters prevailed above the 
mountains, and fifteen cubits above their summits; and by the Name RUACHIAH, 2 by which 
God having purged the Ages, He will make His Holy Spirit to descend upon the Universe, and 
will cast ye, ye rebellious Spirits, and unclean beings, into the Depths of the Lake of the Abyss, 
in misery, filth, and mire, and will place ye in impure and foul dungeons bound with eternal 
chains of fire. 


By these Names then, and by all the other Holy Names of God before Whom no man can stand 
and live, and which Names the armies of the Demons fear, tremble at, and shudder; we conjure 
ye, we potently exorcise and command ye, conjuring ye in addition by the terrible and 
tremendous PATHS 3 of GOD and by His Holy habitation wherein He reigneth and commandeth 
unto the eternal Ages. Amen. 


By the virtue of all these aforesaid, we command ye that ye remain not in any place wherein ye 
are, but to come hither promptly without delay to do that which we shall enjoin ye. But if ye be 
still contumacious, we, by the Authority of a Sovereign and Potent God, deprive ye of all quality, 
condition, degree, and place which ye now enjoy, and precipitate ye into and relegate ye unto the 
Kingdom of Fire and of Sulphur, to be there eternally tormented. Come ye then from all parts of 
the earth, wheresoever ye may be, and behold the Symbols and Names of that Triumphant 
Sovereign Whom all creatures obey, otherwise we shall bind ye and conduct ye in spite of 
yourselves, into our presence bound with chains of fire, because those effects which proceed and 
issue from our Science and operation, are ardent with a fire which shall consume and burn ye 
eternally, for by these the whole Universe trembleth, the earth is moved, the stones thereof rush 
together, all creatures obey, and the rebellious Spirits are tormented by the power of the 
Sovereign Creator. 


Then it is certain that they will come, even if they be bound with chains of fire, unless prevented 
by affairs of the very greatest importance, but in this latter case they will send ambassadors and 
messengers by whom thou shalt easily and surely learn what occupies the Spirits and what they 
are about. But if they appear not yet in answer to the above Conjuration, and are still disobedient, 
then let the Master of the Art or Exorciser arise and exhort his Companions to be of good cheer 
and not to despair of the 


р: 35 


ultimate success of the operation; let him strike the air with the Consecrated Knife towards the 
Four Quarters of the Universe; and then let him kneel in the midst of the Circle, and the 
Companions also in their several places, and let them say consecutively with him in a low voice, 
turning in the direction of the East, the following 


ADDRESS TO THE ANGELS. 


I conjure and pray ye, O ye Angels of God, and ye Celestial Spirits, to come unto mine aid; come 
and behold the Signs of Heaven, and be my witness before the Sovereign Lord, of the 
disobedience of these evil and fallen Spirits who were at one time your companions. 


This being done, let the Master arise, and constrain and force them by a stronger conjuration, in 
manner following. 


Footnotes 


29:1 This Conjuration is almost identical with one given in the 'Lemegeton,' or Lesser Key, a 
different work, also attributed to Solomon. 


30:1 Some MSS. add, 'et furent purifiés.' 


30:2 Some MSS. substitute, Чез hommes furent reduits еп cendre, comme aussi les bœufs, betail, 
et troupeaux des Egyptiens.' 


31:1This is often written PATHTUMON in similar Conjurations, but the MSS. before me agree 
in giving this form. 


32:1 Sometimes, but as I think erroneously, written Bas-dathea. I imagine the word to mean 
Тога of Life." 


32:20Ог the Cross. 


КУ] 


3:1Also written Hipeton; and I believe sometimes replaced by Anapheneton or Anaphaxeton. 


33:2This word is given variously in the MSS., as Oneypheon, Onayepheton, and Donecepheron, 
etc. 


чә 


3:30rElia. 


33:4What is said here refers symbolically to the rooting out of the Evil Spirits, and Shells, from 
the Universe by King Messiach, which is spoken of in the Qabalah. The Qabalah sometimes 
expresses the Evil Spirits by the words animals, or beasts, and creeping things. 


КУ] 


3:5The oldest MSS. gives the above form, in the others it is changed into Japhat, Taphat, and 
even Japhet. It is probably a corruption of Achad Unity. 


чә 


3 


© 


This is also the name of the Angel of Venus. 


чә 


E 


“У 


So written in the oldest MS., the others give it as Zedeesia, Zedeezia, and Zedezias. 


чә 


3:8Meaning 'emanating from God." It is corrupted into Sephosiel, etc., in the MSS. 


(0S) 


4:1Јаћа, in 10862 Add. MSS. 


шө 


4:2 Meaning Spirit of Iah. 


34:3 That is, the hidden and occult grades and links of emanation in the Sephiroth. The later 
MSS. have put, by a mistake, voix for voies; the oldest Latin MS. gives Semitis. 


CHAPTER VII 


AN EXTREMELY POWERFUL CONJURATION 


BEHOLD us again prepared to conjure ye by the Names and Symbols of God, wherewith we are 
fortified, and by the virtue of the Highest One. We command ye and potently ordain ye by the 

most strong and powerful Names of God, Who is worthy of all praise, admiration, honour, glory, 
veneration, and fear, that ye delay not longer, but that ye appear before us without any tumult or 
disturbance, but, on the contrary, with great respect and courtesy, in a beautiful and human form. 


If they then appear, let them see the Pentacles, and say: 


Obey ye, Obey ye, behold the Symbols and Names of the Creator; be ye gentle and peaceable, 
and obey in all things that we shall command ye. 


They will then immediately talk with thee, as a friend speaketh unto a friend. Ask of them all that 
thou desirest, with constancy, firmness, and assurance, and they will obey thee. 


But if they appear not yet, let not the Master on that account lose his courage, for there is nothing 
in the world stronger and of greater force to overawe the Spirits than constancy. Let him, 
however, re-examine and reform the Circle, and let him take up a little dust of the earth, which 
he shall cast towards the Four Quarters of the Universe; and having placed his Knife upon the 
ground, let him say on his knees, turning towards the direction of the North: 


In the Name of ADONAI ELOHIM TZABAOTH SHADDAI, Lord God of Armies Almighty, 
may we successfully perform the works of our hands, and may the Lord be present with us in our 
heart and in our lips. 


These words having been said kneeling upon the earth, let the Master shortly after arise and open 
his arms wide as if wishing to embrace the air, and say: 


CONJURATION. 


By the Holy Names of God written in this Book, and by the other Holy and Ineffable Names 
which are written in the Book of Life, we 


0:37 


conjure уе to come unto us promptly and without any delay, wherefore tarry not, but appear in а 
beautiful and agreeable form and figure, by these Holy Names: ADONAI, TZABAOTH, EL, 
ELOHI, ELOHIM, SHADDAI; and by EHEIEH, YOD HE VAU HE,which is the Great Name of 
God TETRAGRAMMATON written with Four Letters, ANAPHODITON, and Ineffable; by the 
God of those Virtues and Potencies, Who dwelleth in the Heavens, Who rideth upon the 
Kerubim, Who moveth upon the Wings of the Wind, He Whose Power is in Heaven and in Earth, 
Who spake and it was done, Who commanded and the whole Universe was created; and by the 
Holy Names and in the Holy Names, ТАН, ТАН, IAH, ADONAI TZABAOTH; and by all the 


Names of God, the Living, and the True, I reiterate the Conjuration, and I conjure ye afresh ye 
Evil and rebellious Spirits, abiding in the Abysses of Darkness. 


I conjure, I address, and I exorcise ye, that ye may approach unto and come before the Throne of 
God, the Living and the True, and before the Tribunal of the judgment of His Majesty, and 
before the Holy Angels of God to hear the sentence of your condemnation. 


Come ye then by the Name and in the Name Of SHADDAI, which is that of God Almighty, 
strong, powerful, admirable, exalted, pure, clean, glorified, virtuous, great, just, terrible, and 
holy; and by the Name and in the Name of EL, ТАН, ТАН, ТАН, Who hath formed and created 
the world by the Breath of His Mouth, Who supporteth it by His Power, Who ruleth and 
governeth it by His Wisdom, and Who hath cast ye for your pride into the Land of Darkness and 
into the Shadow of Death. 


Therefore, by the Name of the Living God, Who hath formed the heavens above, and hath laid 
the foundations of the earth beneath, we command ye that, immediately and without any delay, 
ye come unto us from all places, valleys, mountains, hills, fields, seas, rivers, fountains, ponds, 
brooks, caverns, grottos, cities, towns, villages, markets, fairs, habitations, baths, courtyards, 
gardens, vineyards, plantations, reservoirs, cisterns, and from every corner of the terrestrial earth 
where ye may happen to be in your assemblies, so that ye may execute and accomplish our 
demands with all mildness and courtesy; by that Ineffable Name which Moses heard and 
invoked, which he received from God from the midst of the Burning Bush, we conjure ye to 
obey our commands, and to come unto us promptly with all gentleness of manner. 


Again we command ye with vehemence, and we exorcise ye with constancy, that ye and all your 
comrades come unto us in an agreeable and gracious manner like the breeze, to accomplish 
successively our various commands and desires. Come ye, then, by the virtue of these Names by 
the which we exorcise ye; АМАТ, A CHHAD, TRANSIN, EMETH, CHAIA, IONA, PROFA, 
TITACHE, BEN ANI, BRIAH, THEIT; all which names are 


p. 38 
written in Heaven in the characters of Malachim, : that is to say, the tongue of the Angels. 


We then, by the just judgment of God, by the Ineffable and Admirable Virtue of God, just, 
living, and true, we call ye with power, we force and exorcise ye by and in the admirable Name 
which was written on the Tables of Stone which God gave upon Mount Sinai; and by and in the 
wonderful Name which Aaron the High Priest bare written upon his breast, by which also God 
created the World, the which name is AXINETON; and by the Living God Who is One 
throughout the Ages, whose dwelling is in the Ineffable Light, Whose Name is Wisdom, and 
Whose Spirit is Life, before Whom goeth forth Fire and Flame, Who hath from that Fire formed 
the firmament, the Stars and the Sun; and Who with that Fire will burn ye all for ever, as also all 
who shall contravene the Words of His Will. 


Come ye, then, without delay, without noise, and without rage, before us, without any deformity 
or hideousness, to execute all our will; come ye from all places wherein ye are, from all 
mountains, valleys, streams, rivers, brooks, ponds, places, baths, synagogues; for God, strong 


and powerful, will chase ye and constrain ye, being glorious over all things; He will compel ye, 

both ye and the Prince of Darkness. Come ye, come ye, Angels of Darkness; come hither before 
this Circle without fear, terror, or deformity, to execute our commands, and be ye ready both to 

achieve and to complete all that we shall command ye. 


Come ye, then, by the Crown of the Chief of your Emperors, and by the Sceptres of your power, 
and of SID, the Great Demon, your Master; by the Names and in the Names of the Holy Angels 
who have been created to be above you, long before the constitution of the world; and by the 
Names of the two Princes of the Universe, whose Names are IONIEL апа SEFONIEL; by the 
rod of Moses, by the staff of Jacob; by the ring and seal of David, wherein are written the Names 
of Sovereign God; and by the Names of the Angels by which Solomon has linked and bound ye; 
and by the sacred bonds by which ANAEL hath environed and hath conquered the Spirit; and by 
the Name of the Angel who ruleth potently over the rest, and by the praise of all creatures who 
cry incessantly unto God, Who spake, and immediately all things, even the Ages, were made and 
formed; and by the Name HA-QADOSCH BERAKHA, which signifieth the Holy and Blessed 
One; and by the Ten Choirs of the Holy Angels, CHAIOTH HA-QADESH, AUPHANIM, 
ARALIM, CHASHMALIM, SERAPHIM, MALACHIM, ELOHIM, BENI ELOHIM, 
KERUBIM, and ISHIM; and by and 


р: 39 


in the Sacred name of Twelve Letters of which each Letter is the Name of an Angel, and the 
letters of the Name are ALEPH, 1 BETH, BETH, NUN, VAU, RESH, VAU, CHETH, HE, 
QOPH, DALETH, SHIN. 


By these Names therefore, and by all the other Holy Names, we conjure ye and we exorcise ye 
by the Angel ZECHIEL; by the Angel DUCHIEL; by the Angel DONACHIEL and by the Great 
Angel METATRON, Who is the Prince of the Angels, and introduceth the Souls before the Face 
of God; and by the Angel SANGARIEL, by whom the portals of Heaven are guarded; and by the 
Angel KERUB, who was made the Guardian of the Terrestrial Paradise, with a Sword of Flame, 
after the expulsion of Adam our forefather; and by the Angel MICHAEL by whom ye were 
hurled down from the Height of the THRONE into the Depth of the Lake and of the Abyss, the 
same Name meaning, 'Who is like God upon Earth'; and by the Angel ANIEL; and by the Angel 
OPHIEL; and by the Angel BEDALIEL; wherefore, by these and by all the other Holy Names of 
the Angels, we powerfully conjure and exorcise ye, that ye come from all parts of the world 
immediately, and without any delay, to perform our will and demands, obeying us quickly and 
courteously, and that ye come by the Name and in the Name of ALEPH, DALETH, NUN, IOD, 
for we exorcise ye anew by the application of these Letters, by whose power burning fire is 
quenched, and the whole Universe trembleth. 


We constrain ye yet again by the Seal of the Sun which is the Word of God; and by the Seal of 
the Moon and of the Stars we bind ye; and by the other Animals and Creatures which are in 
Heaven, by whose wings Heaven cleanseth itself, we force and attract ye imperiously to execute 
our will without failure. And we conjure, oblige, and terribly exorcise ye, that ye draw near unto 
us without delay and without fear, as far as is possible unto ye, here before this Circle, as 
supplicants gently and with discretion, to accomplish our will in all and through all. If ye come 
promptly and voluntarily, ye shall inhale our perfumes, and our suffumigations of pleasant 


odour, which will be both agreeable and delightful unto ye. Furthermore ye will see the Symbol 
of your Creator, and the Names of his Holy Angels, and we shall afterwards dismiss ye, and send 
ye hence with thanks. But if, on the contrary, ye come not quickly, and ye show yourselves self- 
opinionated, rebellious, and contumacious, we shall conjure ye again, and exorcise ye 
ceaselessly, and will repeat all the aforesaid words and Holy Names of God and of the Holy 
Angels; by the which Names we shall harass you, and if that be not sufficient we will add 
thereunto 


p. 40 


yet greater and more powerful ones, and we will thereunto again add other Names which ye have 
not yet heard from us, which are those of an Almighty God, and which will make ye tremble and 
quake with fear, both ye and your princes; by the which Names we conjure both you and them 
also, and we shall not desist from our work until the accomplishment of our will. But if 
perchance ye yet shall harden yourselves, and show yourselves self-opinionated, disobedient, 
rebellious, refractory, and contumacious, and if ye yet resist our powerful conjurations, we shall 
pronounce against you this warrant of arrest in the Name of God Almighty, and this definite 
sentence that ye shall fall into dangerous disease and leprosy; and that in sign of the Divine 
Vengeance ye shall all perish by a terrifying and horrible death, and that a fire shall consume and 
devour you on every side, and utterly crush you; and that by the Power of God, a flame shall go 
forth from His Mouth which shall burn ye up and reduce ye unto nothing in Hell. Wherefore 
delay ye not to come, for we shall not cease from these powerful conjurations until ye shall be- 
obliged to appear against your will. 


Thus then, therefore, we anew conjure and exorcise ye by and in the Holy Name Of ON, which 
is interpreted and called God; by the Name and in the Name of EHEIEH, which is the true Name 
of God, Т am He Who is'; by and in the Ineffable Name of Four Letters YOD HE VAU HE, the 
Knowledge and understanding of which is hidden even from the Angels; by the Name and in the 
Name of EL, which signifieth and denoteth the powerful and consuming fire which issueth from 
His Countenance, and which shall be your ruin and destruction; and by the Light of the Angels 
which is kindled and taken ineffably from that flame of Divine ardour. 


By these then, and by other Most Holy Names which we pronounce against you from the bottom 
of our hearts, do we force and constrain ye, if ye be yet rebellious and disobedient. We conjure 
ye powerfully and strongly exorcise ye, that ye come unto us with joy and quickness, without 
fraud or deceit, in truth and not in error. 


Come ye then, come ye, behold the Signs and the Names of your Creator, behold the Holy 
Pentacles by the virtue of which the Earth is moved, the trees thereof and the Abysses tremble. 
Come ye; come ye; come ye. 


These things being thus done and performed, ye shall see the Spirits come from all sides in great 
haste with their Princes and Superiors; the Spirits of the First Order, like Soldiers, armed with 
spears, shields, and corslets; those of the Second Order like Barons, Princes, Dukes, Captains, 
and Generals of Armies. For the Third and last Order their King will appear, before whom go 
many players on instruments of 


p. 41 
music, accompanied by beautiful and melodious voices which sing in chorus. 


Then the Exorcist, or Master of the Art, at the arrival of the King, whom he shall see crowned 
with a Diadem, should uncover the Holy Pentacles and Medals which he weareth upon his breast 
covered with a cloth of silk or of fine twined linen, and show them unto him, saying:-- 


Behold the Signs and Holy Names by and before whose power every knee should bow, of all that 
is in Heaven, upon Earth, or in Hell. Humble ye yourselves, therefore, under the Mighty hand of 
God. 


Then will the King bow the knee before thee, and will say, 'What dost thou wish, and wherefore 
hast thou caused us to come hither from the Infernal Abodes?' 


Then shall the Exorcist, or Master of Magical Art, with an assured air and a grave and imperious 
voice, order and command him to be tranquil, to keep the rest of his attendants peaceable, and to 
impose silence upon them. 


Let him, also, renew his fumigations, and offer large quantities of Incense, which he should at 
once place upon the fire, in order to appease the Spirits as he hath promised them. He should 
then cover the Pentacles, and he will see wonderful things, which it is impossible to relate, 
touching worldly matters and all sciences. 


This being finished, let the Master uncover the Pentacles, and demand all that he shall wish from 
the King of the Spirits, and if there are one or two Spirits only, it will be the same; and having 
obtained all his desire, he shall thus license them to depart:-- 


THE LICENSE TO DEPART. 


In the Name of АРОМАТ, the Eternal and Everlasting One, let each of you return unto his place; 
be there peace between us and you, and be ye ready to come when ye are called. 


After this he should recite the first chapter of Genesis, 'Berashith Bara Elohim, In the beginning, 
etc.' 


This being done, let them all in order quit the Circle, one after the other, the Master first. 
Furthermore let them bathe their faces with the exorcised water, as will be hereafter told, and 
then let them take their ordinary raiment and go about their business. 


Take notice and observe carefully that this last conjuration is of so great importance and efficacy, 
that even if the Spirits were bound with chains of iron and fire, or shut up in some strong place, 
or retained by an oath, they could not even then delay to come. But supposing that they were 
being conjured in some other place or part of the Universe by some other Exorcist or Master of 
the Art, by the same conjuration; the Master 


p. 42 


should add to his conjuration that they should at least send him some Messengers, or some 
individual to declare unto him where they are, how employed, and the reason why they cannot 
come and obey him. 


But if (which is almost impossible) they be even yet self-opinionated and disobedient, and 
unwilling to obey; in this case their names should be written on virgin paper, which he should 
soil and fill with mud, dust, or clay. Then he shall kindle a fire with dry rue, upon which he shall 
put powdered assafcetida, and other things of evil odour; after which let him put the aforesaid 
names, written on parchment or-virgin paper, upon the fire, saying:-- 


THE CONJURATION OF THE FIRE. 


I conjure thee, O Creature of Fire, by Him who removeth the Earth, and maketh it tremble, that 
thou burn and torment these Spirits, so that they may feel it intensely, and that they may be 
burned eternally by thee. 


This being said, thou shalt cast the aforesaid paper into the fire, saying:-- 


THE CURSE. 
Be ye accursed, damned, and eternally reproved; and be ye tormented 


with perpetual pain, so that ye may find no repose by night nor by day, nor for a single moment 
of time, if ye obey not immediately the command of Him Who maketh the Universe to tremble; 
by these Names, and in virtue of these Names, the which being named and invoked all creatures 
obey and tremble with fear and terror, these Names which can turn aside 


lightning and thunder; and which will utterly make you to perish, destroy, and banish you. These 
Names then are Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth, He, Vau, Zayin, Cheth, Teth, Yod, Kaph, Lamed, 
Mem, Nun, Samekh, Ayin, Pe, Tzaddi, Qoph, Resh, Shin, Tau. 1 


By these secret Names, therefore, and by these signs which are full of Mysteries, we curse ye, 
and in virtue of the power of the Three Principles, Aleph, 2 Mem, Shin, we deprive ye of all 
office and dignity which ye may have enjoyed up till now; and by their virtue and power we 
relegate you into a lake of sulphur and of flame, and unto the deepest depths of the Abyss, that 
ye may burn therein eternally for ever. 


Then will they assuredly come without any delay, and in great haste, crying: 'O Our Lord and 
Prince, deliver us out of this suffering.’ 


All this time thou shouldest have near thee ready an exorcised pen, 
p. 43 


paper, and ink, as will be described hereinafter. Write their Names afresh, and kindle fresh fire, 
whereon thou shalt put gum benjamin, olybdanum, and storax to make therewith a fumigation; 


with these odours thou shalt afresh perfume the aforesaid paper with the Names; but thou 
shouldest have these names ready prepared beforehand. Then show them the Holy Pentacles, and 
ask of them what thou wilt, and thou shalt obtain it; and having gained thy purpose, send away 
the Spirits, saying:-- 


THE LICENSE TO DEPART. 


By the virtue of these Pentacles, and because ye have been obedient, and have obeyed the 
commandments of the Creator, feel and inhale this grateful odour, and afterwards depart ye unto 
your abodes and retreats; be there peace between us and you; be ye ever ready to come when ye 
shall be cited and called; and may the blessing of God, as far as ye are capable of receiving it, be 
upon you, provided ye be obedient and prompt to come unto us without solemn rites and 
observances on our part. 


Thou shouldest further make a Book of virgin paper, and therein write the foregoing 
conjurations, and constrain the Demons to swear upon the same Book that they will come 
whenever they be called, and present themselves before thee, whenever thou shalt wish to 
consult them. Afterwards thou canst cover this Book with sacred Sigils on a plate of silver, and 
therein write or engrave the Holy Pentacles. Thou mayest open this Book either on Sundays or 
on Thursdays, rather at night than by day, and the Spirits will come. 


Regarding the expression 'night,' understand the night following, and not the night preceding the 
aforesaid days. And remember that by day (the Demons) are ashamed, for they are Animals of 
Darkness. 


Footnotes 


38:1 The Mystic Alphabet known as the 'Writing of Malachim' is formed from the positions of 
the Stars in the heavens, by drawing imaginary lines from one star to another so as to obtain the 
shapes of the characters of this Alphabet. 


39:1 Which Letters I have, with much care, corrected, for in the MSS. the letters are jumbled 
together in hopeless confusion, Seym is written for Shin, Res for Beth, etc. The Name is Ab, Ben, 
Ve Ruach Ha-Qadesch, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, There are two other Names of Twelve 
Letters frequently employed, HQDVSh BRVK HVA, Holy and Blessed be He; and ADNI 
HMLK NAMN, The Lord, the faithful King; besides other forms. 


42:1 Which are the Names of the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, to each of which a special 
mystic meaning and power is attached, besides its ordinary application. 


42:2 The Literal Symbols of Air, Water, and Fire; which are called by the Sepher Yetzirah the 
Three Mother Letters. 


CHAPTER УШ 


CONCERNING THE MEDALS OR PENTACLES, AND THE MANNER OF 
CONSTRUCTING THEM 


As we have already made mention of the Pentacles, it is necessary that thou shouldest understand 
that the whole Science and understanding of our Key dependeth upon the operation, Knowledge, 
and use of Pentacles. 


He then who shall wish to perform any operation by the means of the Medals, or Pentacles, and 
therein to render himself expert, must observe what hath been hereinbefore ordained. Let him 
then, O my Son Roboam, know and understand that in the aforesaid Pentacles he shall find those 
Ineffable and Most Holy Names which were written by the finger of God in the Tablets of 
Moses; and which I, Solomon, have received through the Ministry of an Angel by Divine 
Revelation. These then have I collected together, arranged, consecrated, and kept, for the benefit 
of the human race, and the preservation of Body and of Soul. 


The Pentacles should then be made in the days and hours of Mercury, when the Moon is in an 
aerial ior terrestrial sign; she should also be in her increase, and in equal number of days with the 
Sun. 


It is necessary to have a Chamber or Cabinet specially set apart and newly cleaned, wherein thou 
canst remain without interruption, the which having entered with thy Companions, thou shalt 
incense and perfume it with the odours and perfumes of the Art. The sky should be clear and 
serene. It is necessary that thou shouldest have one or more pieces of virgin paper prepared and 
arranged ready, as we shall tell you more fully later on, in its place. 


Thou shalt commence the writing or construction of the Pentacles in the hour aforesaid. Among 
other things, thou shalt chiefly use these colours: Gold, Cinnabar or Vermilion Red, and celestial 
or brilliant Azure Blue. Furthermore, thou shalt make these Medals or Pentacles with exorcised 
pen and colours, as we shall hereafter show thee. 


p. 45 


Whensoever thou constructest them, if thou canst complete them in the hour wherein thou didst 
begin them, it is better. However, if it be absolutely necessary to interrupt the work, thou 
shouldest await the proper day and hour before re-commencing it. 


The Pentacles being finished and completed, take a cloth of very fine silk, as we shall hereafter 
ordain thee, in the which thou shalt wrap the Pentacles. After which thou shalt take a large 
Vessel of Earth filled with Charcoal, upon the which there must be put frankincense, mastic, and 
aloes, all having been previously conjured and exorcised as shall hereafter be told thee. Thou 
must also be thyself pure, clean, and washed, as thou shalt find given in the proper place. 
Furthermore, thou shouldest have the Sickle or Knife of Magical Art, with the which thou shalt 
make a Circle, and trace within it an inner circle, and in the space between the two thou shalt 
write the Names of God, 1 which thou shalt think fit and proper. It is necessary after this that thou 


shouldest have within the Circle a vessel of earth with burning coals and odoriferous perfumes 
thereon; with the which thou shalt fumigate the aforesaid Pentacles; and, having turned thy face 
towards the East, thou shalt hold the said Pentacles over the smoke of the Incense, and shalt 
repeat devoutly the following Psalms of David my Father: Psalms viii., xxi., xxvii., ххіх., XXXİİ., 
li., Ixxii., CXXXİV. 2 


(For a convenient form of Circle which may be used for preparing Instruments and other things 
of the same kind, as well as for consecrating the Pentacles, see Figure 3.) 


After this thou shalt repeat the following Oration:-- 


THE ORATION. 


O ADONAI most powerful, EL most strong, AGLA most holy, ON Most righteous, the 

ALEPH 3 and the TAU, the Beginning and the End; Thou Who hast established all things in Thy 
Wisdom; Thou Who has chosen Abraham Thy faithful servant, and hast promised that in his seed 
shall all nations of the earth be blessed, which seed Thou hast multiplied as the Stars of Heaven; 
Thou Who hast appeared unto Thy servant Moses in flame in the midst of the Burning Bush, and 
hast made him walk with dry feet through the Red Sea; Thou Who gavest the Law to him upon 
Mount Sinai; Thou Who hast granted unto Solomon Thy Servant these Pentacles by Thy great 
Mercy, for the preservation of Soul and of Body; we most humbly implore and supplicate Thy 
Holy Majesty, that these Pentacles may be consecrated by Thy power, and prepared in such 
manner that 


p. 46 


they may obtain virtue and strength against all Spirits, through Thee, O Most Holy ADONAI, 
Whose Kingdom, Empire, and principality remaineth and endureth without end. 


These words being said, thou shalt perfume the Pentacles with the same sweet scents and 
perfumes, and afterwards having wrapped them in a piece of prepared silk cloth, thou shalt put 
them in a place fit and clean, which thou mayest open whenever it shall please thee, and close it 
again, at thy pleasure and according unto thy will. We will hereafter show thee the method and 
manner of preparing the aforesaid place, of perfuming it with scents and sweet odours, and of 
sprinkling it with the Water and Water-Sprinkler of Magical Art; for all these things contain 
many good properties, and innumerable virtues, as experience will easily teach thee. 


We have already said sufficient regarding the Solemn Conjuration of Spirits. 


We have also spoken enough in our present Key, regarding the manner in which it is necessary to 
attract the Spirits so as to make them speak. Now, by Divine aid, I will teach thee how to 
perform certain experiments with success. 


Know, ı О my Son Roboam, that all the Divine Sigils, Characters, and Names (which are the 
most precious and excellent things in Nature, whether Terrestrial or Celestial), should be written 
by thee each separately, 


when thou art in a state of grace and purity, upon virgin parchment, with ordinary ink, in the 
beginning of the month 2 of August before sunrise, raising thine eyes unto heaven, and turning 
towards the east. Thou shalt preserve them to suspend from thy neck, whichever thou wilt, on the 
day and hour wherein thou wast born, after which thou shalt take heed to name every day ten 
times, the Name which is hung from thy neck, turning towards the East, and thou mayest be 
assured that no enchantment or any other danger shall have power to harm thee. 


Furthermore thou shalt vanquish all adversities, and shalt be cherished and loved by the Angels 
and Spirits, provided that thou hast made their characters and that thou hast them upon thee; I 
assure thee that this is the true way to succeed with ease in all thine operations, for being 
fortified with a Divine Name, and the Letters, Characters, and Sigils, applicable unto the 
operation, thou shalt discover with what supernatural exactitude and very great promptitude, both 
Terrestrial and Celestial things will be obedient unto thee. But all this will only be true, when 
accompanied by the Pentacles which hereinafter follow, seeing that the Seals, Characters, and 
Divine Names, serve only to fortify the work, to preserve from unforeseen accidents, and to 
attract the familiarity of the Angels and Spirits 


p. 47 


which is one reason, my Son, that before making any experiment, I order thee to read and re-read 
my Testament, not once only but many times, so that being perfectly instructed In the several 
Ceremonies thou mayest in no way fail, and that thus what shall have previously appeared to 
thee difficult and lengthy, may become in process of time easy and of very great use. 


I am about to endow thee with many secrets, which I charge thee never to employ for an evil 
purpose, for ACCURSED BE HE WHO TAKETH THE NAME OFALMIGHTY GOD IN 
VAIN; but thou mayest without any other ceremonies make use of them, provided that, as I have 
already said, thou hast only the Glory of Eternal God for thine object. Thus, after having taught 
thee all the Ceremonies which concern the manner of performing the Operations, I am at length 
determined to make thee a partaker in the secrets of which I have particular knowledge, unknown 
to this day unto the generality of men; but, nevertheless, only on the condition that thou 
attemptest not the ruin and destruction of thy neighbour, for his blood will cry for vengeance 
unto God, and in the end thou and thine shall feel the just wrath of an offended Deity. However, 
God not having forbidden honest and lawful pleasures, thou mayest perform boldly the 
Operations which follow, it being always especially necessary to distinguish between the good 
and the evil, so as to choose the former and avoid the latter, which is why I command thee to be 
attentive to all that is contained in this my Testament. 


Footnotes 
44:li.e. in Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn. 
45:1Preferably those having some reference to the work in hand. 


45:2 I have given the numbers of the Psalms according to the English, not the Hebrew numbers. 


45:3 The Qabalistic word AZOTH may be substituted for 'the Aleph and the Tau.' 
46:1From here to the end of the Chapter is only given in Lansdowne MSS. 1203. 


46:2i.e.When the Sun is in the Sign Leo. 


CHAPTER Ix 


OF THE EXPERIMENT CONCERNING THINGS STOLEN, AND HOW IT 
SHOULD BE PERFORMED 


My beloved Son, if thou findest any Theft, thou shalt do as is hereinafter ordained, and with the 
help of God thou shalt find that which hath been taken away. 


If the hours and days be not otherwise ordained in this operation, thou must refer to what hath 
already been said. But before commencing any operation whatsoever for the recovery of things 
stolen, after having made all necessary preparations, thou shalt say the following Oration:-- 


THE ORATION. 
Ateh 1 Adonai Elohim Asher Ha-Shamain Ve-Ha-Aretz, etc. 


Thou, O Lord, Who hast made both Heaven and Earth, and hast measured them in the hollow of 
Thy hand; Thou Who art seated upon the Kerubim and the Seraphim, in the high places, 
whereunto human understanding cannot penetrate; Thou Who hast created all things by Thine 
agency, in Whose Presence are the Living Creatures, of which four are marvellously volatile, 
which have six wings, and who incessantly cry aloud: 'QADOSCH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, 
ADONAI ELOHIM TZABAOTH, Heaven and Earth are full of Thy glory'; О Lord God, Thou 
Who hast expelled Adam from the Terrestrial Paradise, and Who hast placed the Kerubim to 
guard the Tree of Life, Thou art the Lord Who alone doest wonders; show forth I pray Thee Thy 
Great Mercy, by the Holy City of Jerusalem, by Thy wonderful Name of four letters which are 
YOD, HE, VAU, HE, and by Thy Holy and Admirable Name, give unto me the power and virtue 
to enable me to accomplish this experiment, and to come unto the desired end of this operation; 
through Thee Who art Life, and unto Whom Life belongeth unto the eternal ages. Amen. 


After this perfume and cense the place with good scents and sweet 


p. 49 


odours. This aforesaid place should be pure, clean, safe from interruption or disturbance, and 
proper to the work, as we shall hereafter show. Then sprinkle the aforesaid place with 
consecrated Water, as is laid down in the Chapter concerning Circles. 


The Operation being in such wise prepared, thou shalt rehearse the Conjuration necessary for this 
experiment, at the end of which Thou shalt say as follows:-- 


O Almighty Father and Lord, Who regardest the Heavens, the Earth, and the Abyss, mercifully 
grant unto me by Thy Holy Name written with four letters, YOD, HE, VAU, HE, that by this 
exorcism I may obtain virtue, Thou Who art ТАН, ТАН, ТАН, grant that by Thy power these 
Spirits may discover that which we require and which we hope to find, and may they show and 
declare unto us the persons who have committed the theft, and where they are to be found. 


I conjure ye anew, ye Spirits above named, by all the aforesaid Names, through which all things 
created tremble, that ye show openly unto me (or unto this child here present with us 1) those 
things which we seek. 


These things being accomplished they will make thee to see plainly that which thou seekest. 
Take note that the Exorcist, or Master of the Art, should be such as is ordained in the Chapter 
concerning the Exorcist and his Companions; and if in this experiment it should be necessary to 
write down characters or Names, thou shalt do that which it is necessary to observe regarding the 
pen, ink, and paper, as is duly prescribed in the Chapters concerning them. 


For if thou dost not regard these things, thou wilt neither accomplish that which thou desirest, 
nor atrive at thy desired end. 


HOW TO KNOW WHO HAS COMMITTED A THEFT. 2 


Take a Sieve and suspend it by a piece of cord wherewith a man has been hung, which should be 
fastened round the circumference of the rim. Within the rim write with blood in the four 
divisions thereof the characters given in Figure 4. After this take a basin of brass perfectly clean 
which thou shalt fill with water from a fountain, and having pronounced these words: DIES 
MIES YES-CHET BENE DONE FET DONNIMA METEMAUZ, make the sieve spin round 
with thy left hand, and at the same time turn with thy right hand the water in the basin in a 
contrary direction, by stirring it with a twig of green laurel. When the water becometh still and 
the sieve no longer whirls, gaze fixedly into the water, and thou shalt see the form of him who 
hath committed the theft; and in order that 


p. 50 


thou mayest the more easily recognise him, thou shalt mark him in some part of his face with the 
Magical Sword of Art; for that sign which thou shalt have cut therewith in the water, shall be 
really found thereafter upon his own person. 


THE MANNER OF CAUSING THE SIEVE TO TURN, THAT THOU 
MAYEST KNOW WHO HAS COMMITTED THE THEFT. 1 


Take a Sieve and stick into the outside of the rim the open points of a pair of scissors, and having 
rested the rings of the said opened scissors on the thumb-nails of two persons, let one of them 
say the following Prayer:-- 


PRAYER. 


DIES MIES YES-CHET BENE DONE FET DONNIMA METEMAUZ; О Lord, Who 
liberatedst the holy Susanna from a false accusation of crime; O Lord, Who liberatedst the holy 
Thekla; O Lord, Who rescuedst the holy Daniel from the den of lions, and the Three Children 
from the burning fiery furnace, free the innocent and reveal the guilty. 


After this let him or her pronounce aloud the names and surnames of all the persons living in the 
house where the theft hast been committed, who may be suspected of having stolen the things in 
question, saying:-- 

'By Saint Peter and Saint Paul, such a person hath not done this thing. 

And let the other reply 

"By Saint Peter and Saint Paul, he (or she) hath not done it.' 

Let this be repeated thrice for each person named and suspected, and it is certain that on naming 


the person who hath committed the theft or done the crime, the sieve will turn of itself without its 
being able to stop it, and by this thou shalt know the evil doer. 


Footnotes 


48:1This is simply the Hebrew of the prayer which follows; but in the MS. Codices it is so 
mutilated as to be worthless. 


49:1A child employed as a clairvoyant in the operation; as is still the custom in some places in 
the East. 


49:2The rest of this Chapter is from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


50:1This is the ancient divination by the sieve and shears, and from St. Peter and St. Paul being 
mentioned in it, has evidently undergone a mediaeval reconstruction. 


CHAPTER X 


OF THE EXPERIMENT OF INVISIBILITY, AND HOW IT SHOULD BE 
PERFORMED 


IF thou wishest to perform the Experiment of Invisibility, thou shalt follow the instructions for 
the same. If it be necessary to observe the day and the hour, thou shalt do as is said in their 
Chapters. But if thou needest not observe the day and the hour as marked in the Chapter thereon, 
thou shalt do as taught in the Chapter which precedeth it. If in the course of the experiment it be 
necessary to write anything, it should be done as is described in the Chapters pertaining thereto, 
with the proper pen, paper, and ink, or blood. But if the matter is to be accomplished by 
invocation, before thy conjurations, thou shalt say devoutly in thine heart:-- 


SCEABOLES, ARBARON, ELOHI, ELIMIGITH, HERENOBULCULE, METHE, BALUTH, 
TIMAYAL, VILLAQUIEL, TEVENI, YEVIE, FERETE, BACUHABA, GUVARIN; through 
Him by Whom ye have empire and power over men, ye must accomplish this work so that I may 
go and remain invisible. 


And if it be necessary in this operation to trace a Circle, thou shalt do as is ordained in the 
Chapter concerning Circles; and if it be necessary to write characters, etc., thou shalt follow the 
instructions given in the respective Chapters. 


This operation being thus prepared, if there be an especial Conjuration to perform, thou shalt 
repeat it in the proper manner; if not, thou shalt say the general Conjuration, at the end of which 
thou shalt add the following words:-- 


O thou ALMIRAS, Master of Invisibility, with thy Ministers CHEROG, MAITOR, 
TANGEDEM, TRANSIDIM, SUVANTOS, ABELAIOS, BORED, BELAMITH, CASTUMI, 
DABUEL; I conjure уе by Him Who maketh Earth and Heaven to tremble, Who is seated upon 
the Throne of His Majesty, that this operation may be perfectly accomplished according to my 
will, so that at whatsoever time it may please me, I may be able to be invisible. 


I conjure thee anew, O ALMIRAS, Chief of Invisibility, both thee and 
p. 52 


thy Ministers, by Him through Whom all things have their being, and by SATURIEL, 
HARCHIEL, DANIEL, BENIEL, ASSIMONEM, that thou immediately comest hither with all 
thy Ministers, and achievest this operation, as thou knowest it ought to be accomplished, and that 
by the same operation thou render me invisible, so that none may be able to see me. 


In order then to accomplish this aforesaid operation, thou must prepare all things necessary with 
requisite care and diligence, and put them in practice with all the general and particular 
ceremonies laid down for these experiments; and with all the conditions contained in our first 
and second Books. Thou shalt also in the same operations duly repeat the appropriate 


Conjurations, with all the solemnitieS marked in the respective Chapters. Thus shalt thou 
accomplish the experiment surely and without hindrance, and thus shalt thou find it true. 


But, on the contrary, if thou lettest any of these things escape thee, or if thou despiseth them, 
never shalt thou be able to arrive at thy proposed end; as, for example, we enter not easily into a 
fenced city over its walls but through its gates. 


HOW : TO RENDER ONESELF INVISIBLE. 


Make a small image of yellow wax, in the form of a man, in the month January and in the day 
and hour of Saturn, and at that time write with a needle above the crown of its head and upon its 
skull which thou shalt have adroitly raised, the character following. (See Figure 5.) After which 
thou shalt replace the skull in proper position. Thou shalt then write upon a small strip of the skin 
of a frog or toad which thou shalt have killed, the following words and characters. (See Figure 
6.) Thou shalt then go and suspend the said figure by one of thy hairs from the vault of a cavern 
at the hour of midnight, and perfuming it with the proper incense thou shalt say:-- 


METATRON, MELEKH, BEROTH, NOTH, VENIBBETH, MACH, and all ye, I conjure thee, 
O Figure of wax, by the Living God, that by the virtue of these Characters and words, thou 
render me invisible, wherever I may bear thee with me. Amen. 


And after having censed it anew, thou shalt bury it in the same place in a small deal box, and 
every time that thou wishest to pass or enter into any place without being seen, thou shalt say 
these words, bearing the aforesaid figure in thy left pocket:-- 


Come unto me and never quit me whithersoever I shall go. 


Afterwards thou shalt take it carefully back unto the before-mentioned place and cover it with 
earth until thou shalt need it again. 


Footnotes 


52:1The rest of this Chapter is from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER XI 


TO HINDER A SPORTSMAN FROM KILLING ANY GAME ı 


TAKE a stick of green elder, from the two ends of which thou shalt clean out the pith. In each 
end place a strip of parchment of hare-skin, having written thereon with the blood of a black hen 
the following character and word. (See Figure 7.) Having made two of these slips, place one in 
each end of the stick and close the apertures up with pith, afterwards on a Friday in the month of 
February thou shalt fumigate the aforesaid stick with suitable incense thrice in the air, and having 
taken it thence thou shalt bury it in the earth under an elder-tree. Afterwards thou shalt expose it 
in the pathway by which the sportsman will pass, and once he has passed by it, he need not hope 
to kill any game during that day. If thou shalt wish a second time to lay a spell upon him in like 
manner, thou needest but to expose the stick again in his path; but take care to bury it again in 
the earth under an elder-tree, so as to be able to take it from thence each time that thou shalt have 
need of it; and to take it up each time as soon as the sportsman shall have passed. 


Footnotes 


3:1 This Chapter is taken from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER XII 


HOW : TO MAKE THE MAGIC GARTERS 


TAKE enough of the skin of a stag to make two hollow tubular Garters, but before stitching them 
up thou shalt write on the side of the skin which was next the flesh the words and characters 
shown in Figure 8, with the blood of a hare killed on the25th of June, and having filled the said 
Garters with green mugwort gathered also on the 25th of June before sunrise, thou shalt put in 
the two ends of each the eye of the fish called barbel; and when thou shalt wish to use them thou 
shalt get up before sunrise and wash them in a brook of running water, and place them one on 
each leg above the knee. After this thou shalt take a short rod of holm-oak cut on the same 25th 
of June, turn in the direction thou wishest to go, write upon the ground the name of the place, and 
commencing thy journey thou wilt find it accomplished in a few days and without fatigue. When 
thou wishest to stop thou hast only to say AMECH and beat the air with the aforesaid wand, and 
incontinently thou shalt be on firm ground. 


Footnotes 


54:1 This Chapter is also taken from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER ХПІ, 


HOW TO MAKE THE MAGIC CARPET PROPER FOR INTERROGATING 
THE INTELLIGENCES, SO AS TO OBTAIN AN ANSWER REGARDING 
WHATSOEVER MATTER ONE MAY WISH TO LEARN 


MAKE a Carpet of white and new wool, and when the Moon shall be at her full, in the Sign of 
Capricorn and in the hour of the Sun, thou shalt go into the country away from any habitation of 
man, ina place free from all impurity, and shalt spread out thy Carpet so that one of its points 
shall be towards the east, and another towards the west, and having made a Circle without it and 
enclosing it, thou shalt remain within upon the point towards the east, and holding thy wand in 
the air for every operation, thou shalt call upon MICHAEL, 2 towards the north upon 
RAPHAEL, towards the west upon GABRIEL, and towards the south upon MURIEL. After this 
thou shalt return unto the point of the East and devoutly invoke the Great Name AGLA, and take 
this point of the Carpet in thy left hand; turning then towards the North thou shalt do the same, 
and so continuing to the other points of the Carpet, thou shalt raise them so that they touch not 
the ground, and holding them up thus, and turning anew towards the East thou shalt say with 
great veneration the following Prayer:-- 


PRAYER. 


AGLA, AGLA, AGLA, AGLA; O God Almighty Who art the Life of the Universe and Who 
rulest over the four divisions of its vast form by the strength and virtue of the Four Letters of Thy 
Holy Name Tetragrammaton, YOD, HE, VAU, HE, bless in Thy Name this covering which I 
hold as Thou hast blessed the Mantle of Elijah in the hands of Elisha, so that being covered by 
Thy Wings, nothing may be able to injure me, even as it 


p. 56 


is said:--'He shall hide thee under His Wings and beneath His feathers shall thou trust, His truth 
shall be thy shield and buckler.' 


After this thou shalt fold it up, saying these words following:--RECABUSTIRA, CABUSTIRA, 
BUSTIRA, TIRA, RA, A; and shall keep it carefully to serve thee at need. 


When thou shalt be desirous to make thine interrogations, choose the night of full or of new 
moon, and from midnight until daybreak. Thou shalt transport thyself unto the appointed spot if 
it be for the purpose of discovering a treasure; if not, any place will serve provided it be clean 
and pure. Having had the precaution on the preceding evening to write upon a slip of virgin 
parchment coloured azure-blue, with a pen made from the feather of a dove, this Character and 
Name (see Figure 9); taking thy carpet, thou shalt cover thy head and body therewith, and taking 
the censer, with new fire therein, thou shalt place it in or upon the proper place, and cast thereon 
some incense. Then shalt thou prostrate thyself upon the ground, with thy face towards the earth, 
before the incense beginneth to fume, keeping the fire of the same beneath the carpet, holding 
thy wand upright, against which to rest thy chin; thou shalt hold with thy right hand the aforesaid 
strip of parchment against thy forehead, and thou shalt say the following words:-- 


VEGALE, HAMICATA, UMSA, TERATA, YEH, DAH, MA, BAXASOXA, UN, HORAH, 
HIMESERE; ı O God the Vast One send unto me the Inspiration of Thy Light, make me to 
discover the secret thing which I ask of Thee, whatsoever such or such a thing may be, make me 
to search it out by the aid of Thy holy ministers RAZIEL, TZAPHNIEL, MATMONIEL; Lo, 
Thou hast desired truth in the young, and in the hidden thing shalt Thou make me know wisdom. 
RECABUSTIRA, CABUSTIRA, BUSTIRA, TIRA, RA, A, KARKAHITA, KAHITA, HITA, 
TA. 


And thou shalt hear distinctly the answer which thou shalt have sought. 


Footnotes 
5:1 This Chapter is also taken from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 
55:2 I have usually found Michael attributed to the South; Raphael to the East; Gabriel to the 
West; and Auriel to the North. Likewise I think the operator should turn following the course of 


the Sun, and not contrariwise as in the text. 


56:1These are probably corrupted Hebrew words derived from the prayer itself. 


CHAPTER ХІУ, 


HOW TO RENDER THYSELF MASTER OF A TREASURE POSSESSED BY 
THE SPIRITS 


THE Earth being inhabited, as I have before said unto thee, by a great number of Celestial 
Beings and Spirits, who by their subtilty and prevision know the places wherein treasures are 
hidden, and seeing that it often happeneth that those men who undertake a search for these said 
treasures are molested and sometimes put to death by the aforesaid Spirits, which are called 
Gnomes; which, however, is not done through the Avarice of these said Gnomes, a Spirit being 
incapable of possessing anything, having no material senses wherewith to bring it into use, but 
because these Spirits, who are enemies of the passions, are equally so of Avarice, unto which 
men are so much inclined; and foreseeing the evil ends for which these treasures will be 
employed have some interest and aim in maintaining the earth in its condition of price and value, 
seeing that they are its inhabitants, and when they slightly disturb the workers in such kind of 
treasures, it is a warning which they give them to cease from the work, and if it happen that the 
greedy importunity of the aforesaid workers oblige them to continue, notwithstanding the 
aforesaid warnings, the Spirits, irritated by their despising the same, frequently put the workmen 
to death. But know, O my Son, that from the time that thou shalt have the good fortune to be 
familiar with such kinds of Spirits, and that thou shalt be able by means of what I have taught 
thee to make them submit unto thine orders, they will be happy to give thee, and to make thee 
partaker in that which they uselessly possess, provided that thine object and end shall be to make 
a good use thereof. 


THE MANNER OF PERFORMING THE OPERATION. 


On a Sunday before sunrise, between the 10th of July and the 20th of August, when the moon is 
in the Sign of the Lion, thou shalt go unto 


p. 58 


the place where thou shalt know either by interrogation of the Intelligences, or otherwise, that 
there is a treasure; there thou shalt describe a Circle of sufficient size with the Sword of Magical 
Art wherein to open up the earth, as the nature of the ground will allow; thrice during the day 
shalt thou cense it with the incense proper for the day, after which being clothed in the raiment 
proper for the Operation thou shalt suspend in some way by a machine immediately above the 
opening a lamp, whose oil should be mingled with the fat of a man who has died in the month of 
July, and the wick being made from the cloth wherein he has been buried. Having kindled this 
with fresh fire, thou shalt fortify the workmen with a girdle of the skin of a goat newly slain, 
whereon shall be written with the blood of the dead man from whom thou shalt have taken the fat 
these words and characters (see Figure 10); and thou shalt set them to work in safety, warning 
them not to be at all disturbed at the Spectres which they will see, but to work away boldly. In 
case they cannot finish the work in a single day, every time they shall have to leave it thou shalt 
cause them to put a covering of wood over the opening, and above the covering about six inches 
of earth; and thus shalt thou continue unto the end, being all the time present in the raiment of the 
Art, and with the Magic Sword, during the operation. After which thou shalt repeat this prayer 


PRAYER. 


ADONAI, ELOHIM, EL, ЕНЕЕН ASHER EHEIEH, Prince of Princes, Existence of 
Existences, have mercy upon me, and cast Thine eyes upon Thy Servant (N.), who invokes Thee 
most devoutedly, and supplicates Thee by Thy Holy and tremendous Name Tetragrammaton to 
be propitious, and to order Thine Angels and Spirits to come and take up their abode in this 
place; O ye Angels and Spirits of the Stars, O all ye Angels and Elementary Spirits, O all ye 
Spirits present before the Face of God, I the Minister and faithful Servant of the Most High 
conjure ye, let God Himself, the Existence of Existences, conjure ye to come and be present at 
this Operation, I, the Servant of God, most humbly entreat ye. Amen. 


Having then caused the workmen to fill in the hole, thou shalt license the Spirits to depart, 
thanking them for the favour they have shown unto thee, and saying:-- 


THE LICENSE TO DEPART. 


O ye good and happy Spirits, we thank ye for the benefits which we have just received from your 
liberal bounty; depart ye in peace to govern the Element which God hath destined for your 
habitation. Amen. 


Footnotes 


57:1This is also taken from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER XV 


OF THE EXPERIMENT OF SEEKING FAVOUR AND LOVE: 


IF thou wishest to perform the Experiment of seeking favour and love, observe in what manner 
the Experiment is to be carried out, and if it be dependent upon the day and the hour, perform it 
in the day and the hour required, as thou wilt find it in the Chapter concerning the hours; and if 
the Experiment be one that requireth writing, thou shalt write as it is said in the Chapter 
concerning the same; and if it be with penal bonds, pacts, and fumigations, then thou shalt cense 
with a fit perfume as is said in the Chapter concerning suffumigations; and if it be necessary to 
sprinkle it with water and hyssop, then let it be as in the Chapter concerning the same; similarly 
if such Experiment require characters, names, or the like, let such names be written as the 
Chapter concerning the writing of characters, and place the same in a clean place as hath been 
said. Then thou shalt repeat over it the following Oration:-- 


THE ORATION. 


О ADONAI, most Holy, Most Righteous, and most Mighty God, Who hast made all things 
through Thy Mercy and Righteousness wherewith Thou art filled, grant unto us that we may be 
found worthy that this Experiment may be found consecrated and perfect, so that the Light may 
issue from Thy Most Holy Seat, O ADONAI, which may obtain for us favour and love. Amen. 


This being said, thou shalt place it in clean silk, and bury it for a day and a night at the junction 
of four cross-roads; and whensoever thou wishest to obtain any grace or favour from any, take it, 
having first properly consecrated it according to the rule, and place it in thy right hand, and seek 
thou what thou wilt it shall not be denied thee. But if thou doest not the Experiment carefully and 
rightly, assuredly thou shalt not succeed in any manner. 


p. 60 
For obtaining grace and love write down the following words 


SATOR, 1 AREPO, TENET, OPERA, ROTAS, ТАН, ТАН, ТАН, ENAM, ТАН, ТАН, ТАН, 
KETHER, CHOKMAH, BINAH, GEDULAH, GEBURAH, TIPHERETH, NETZACH, HOD, 
YESOD, MALKUTH, ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB, SHADRACH, MESHACH, 
ABEDNEGO, be ye all present in my aid and for whatsoever I shall desire to obtain. 


Which words being properly written as above, thou shalt also find thy desire brought to pass. 


Footnotes 


59:1 This Chapter is taken from 10862 Add. MSS. 


60:1 This Incantation is also given in 1307 Sloane MSS., page 76. 


CHAPTER ХУІ, 


HOW OPERATIONS OF MOCKERY, INVISIBILITY, AND DECEIT 
SHOULD BE PREPARED 


EXPERIMENTS relating to tricks, mockeries, and deceits, may be performed in many ways. 
When thou shalt wish to practise these experiments with regard to any person, thou shalt observe 
the day and the hour as we have already said. Should it be necessary to write Characters or 
Words, it should be done upon virgin paper, as we shall show farther on. As for the ink, if it be 
not specially ordained in this operation, it is advisable to use the blood of a bat with the pen and 
the needle of art. But before describing or writing the Characters or Names, all the necessary 
rules should be observed as given in the proper Chapters, and having carefully followed out all 
these, thou shalt pronounce with a loud voice the following words :-- 


ABAC, ALDAL, IAT, HUDAC, GUTHAC, GUTHOR, GOMEH, TISTATOR, DERISOR, 
DESTATUR, come hither all ye who love the times and places wherein all kinds of mockeries 
and deceits are practised. And ye who make things disappear and who render them invisible, 
come hither to deceive all those who regard these things, so that they may be deceived, and that 
they may seem to see that which they see not and hear that which they hear not, so that their 
senses may be deceived, and that they may behold that which is not true. 


Come ye then hither and remain, and consecrate this enchantment, seeing that God the Almighty 
Lord hath destined ye for such. 


When this Experiment is completed in this manner in the hour and time which we have shown 
and taught, also the foregoing words ABAC, ALDAL, etc., should be written with the pen as 
hereinafter ordained; but if the Experiment be performed in a different way, yet shalt thou always 
say the aforesaid words, and they should be repeated as before given. 


If thou practisest these things in this manner correctly, thou shalt arrive at the effect of thine 
operations and experiments, by the which thou mayest easily deceive the senses. 


Footnotes 


61:1 This Chapter is given in 10862 Add. MSS., 3981 Harleian MSS., 288 King's MSS., 3091 
Sloane MSS., and 1307 Sloane MSS., but is wanting in 1202 Lansdowne MSS., as are all the 
Chapters of the First Book after Chap. 8. 


CHAPTER XVII 


HOW EXTRAORDINARY EXPERIMENTS AND OPERATIONS SHOULD 
BE PREPARED 


WE have spoken in the preceding Chapters of common experiments and operations, which it is 
more usual to practise and put in operation, and therein thou mayest easily see that we have told 
thee sufficient for their perfection. In this Chapter we treat of extraordinary and unusual 
experiments, which can also be done in many ways. 


None the less should those who wish to put in practice the like experiments and operations 
observe the days and hours as is laid down in the proper Chapters, and should be provided with 
virgin paper and other necessary things. Having prepared a similar experiment thou shalt say 


PRAYER. 


O God Who hast created all things, and hast given unto us discernment to understand the good 
and the evil; through Thy Holy Name, and through these Holy Names:--IOD, IAH, VAU, 
DALETH, VAU, TZABAOTH, ZIO, AMATOR, CREATOR, do Thou, O Lord, grant that this 
experiment may become true and veritable in my hands through Thy Holy Seal, O ADONAI, 
Whose reign and empire remaineth eternally and unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


This being done, thou shalt perform the experiment, observing its hour, and thou shalt perfume 
and incense as is laid down in the proper Chapter; sprinkling with exorcised water, and 
performing all the ceremonies and solemnities as we shall instruct thee in the Second Book of 
our Key. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


CONCERNING THE HOLY PENTACLES OR MEDALS 


THE Medals or Pentacles, which we make for the purpose of striking terror into the Spirits and 
reducing them to obedience, have besides this wonderful and excellent virtue. If thou invokest 
the Spirits by virtue of these Pentacles, they will obey thee without repugnance, and having 
considered them they will be struck with astonishment, and will fear them, and thou shalt see 
them so surprised by fear and terror, that none of them will be sufficiently bold to wish to oppose 
thy will. They are also of great virtue and efficacy against all perils of Earth, of Air, of Water, 
and of Fire, against poison which hath been drunk, against all kinds of infirmities and necessities, 
against binding, sortilege, and sorcery, against all terror and fear, and wheresoever thou shalt 
find thyself, if armed with them, thou shalt be in safety all the days of thy life. 


Through them do we acquire grace and good-will from man and woman, fire is extinguished, 
water is stayed, and all Creatures fear at the sight of the Names which are therein, and obey 
through that fear. 


These Pentacles are usually made of the metal the most suitable to the nature of the Planet; and 
then there is no occasion to observe the rule of particular colours. They should be engraved with 
the instrument of Art in the days and hours proper to the Planet. 


Saturn ruleth over Lead; Jupiter over Tin; Mars over Iron; the Sun over Gold; Venus over 
Copper; Mercury over the mixture of Metals; and the Moon over Silver. 


They may also be made with exorcised virgin paper, writing thereon with the colours adopted for 
each Planet, referring to the rules already laid down in the proper Chapters, and according to the 
Planet with which the Pentacle is in sympathy. 


Wherefore unto Saturn the colour of Black is appropriated; Jupiter ruleth over Celestial Blue; 
Mars over Red; the Sun over Gold, or the colour of Yellow or Citron; Venus over Green; 
Mercury over Mixed Colours; the Moon over Silver, or the colour of Argentine Earth. 


p. 64 


The Matter of which the Pentacle is constructed should be Virgin, never having been used for 
any other purpose; or if it be metal it should be purified by fire. 


As regards the size of the Pentacles it is arbitrary, so long as they are made according to the 
rules, and with the requisite solemnities, as hath been ordained. 


The 1 virtues of the Holy Pentacles are no less advantageous unto thee than the knowledge of the 
secrets which I have already given unto thee; and thou shouldest take particular care if thou 
makest them upon virgin parchment to use the proper colours; and if thou engravest them upon 
metal, to do so in the manner taught thee; and so shalt thou have the satisfaction of seeing them 
produce the promised effect. But seeing that this Science is not a Science of argument and open 


reasoning, but that, on the contrary, it is entirely mysterious and occult, we should not argue and 
deliberate over these matters, and it is sufficient to believe firmly to enable us to bring into 
operation that which hath already been taught. 


When thou shalt construct these Pentacles and Characters, it is necessary never to forget the 
Incense, nor to employ anything beyond that of which mention is made. 


It is necessary, above all things, to be attentive to the operation, and never to forget or omit those 
things which contribute to the success which the Pentacles and Experiments promise, having 
ever in thy mind no other intention than the Glory of God, the accomplishment of thy desires, 
and loving-kindness towards thy neighbour. 


Furthermore, my beloved Son, I order thee not to bury this Science, but to make thy friends 
partakers in the same, subject however to the strict command never to profane the things which 
are Divine, for if thou doest this, far from rendering thee a friend of the Spirits, it will but be the 
means of bringing thee unto destruction. 


But never must thou lavish these things among the ignorant, for that would be as blameable as to 
cast precious gems before swine; on the contrary, from one Sage the secret knowledge should 
pass unto another Sage, for in this manner shall the Treasure of Treasures never descend into 
oblivion. 


Adore 2 and revere the Most Holy Names of God which are found in these Pentacles and 
Characters, for without this never shalt thou be able to come to the end of any enterprise, nor to 
accomplish the Mystery of Mysteries. 


Above all things, remember that to perform any of these operations 


p. 65 
thou must be pure in body and in mind, and without blemish, and on not any of the preparations. 
This Key, full of Mysteries, hath been revealed unto me by an Angel. 


Accursed be he who undertaketh our Art without having the qualities requisite to thoroughly 
understand our Key, accursed be he who invoke the Name of God in vain, for such an one 
prepareth for himself the punishments which await the unbelievers, for God shall abandon them 
a relegate them unto the depths of Hell amongst the impure Spirits. 


For God is great and Immutable, He hath been for ever, and He shall remain even unto the end of 
the Ages. 


ACCURSED BE HE WHO TAKETH THENAME OFGOD IN VAIN! ACCURSED BE HE 
WHO USETH THIS KNOWLEDGE UNTO AN EVIL END, BE HE ACCURSED IN THIS 
WORLD AND IN THE WORLD TO COME. AMEN. BE HE ACCURSED THE NAME 
WHICH HE HATH BLASPHEMED! 


THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK 


Footnotes 
64:1 This and the four following paragraphs are from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


64:2The rest of the Chapter is from 1202 Lansdowne MSS., except the last sentence. 


Plates 


The Order of the Pentacles 
Plate П 
Plate III 
Plate IV 
Plate V. 
Plate VI 
Plate УП 
Plate УШ 
Plate IX 
Plate X 
Plate XI 
Plate ХП 


HERE FOLLOW THE HOLY PENTACLES, EXPRESSED IN THEIR 
PROPER FIGURES AND CHARACTERS, TOGETHER WITH THEIR 
ESPECIAL VIRTUES; FOR THE USE OF THE MASTER OF ART. 


THE ORDER OF THE PENTACLES 


(1.) Seven Pentacles consecrated to Saturn Black. 

(2.) Seven Pentacles consecrated to Jupiter Blue. 

(3.) Seven Pentacles consecrated to Mars = Red. 

(4.) Seven Pentacles consecrated to the Sun = Yellow. 

(5.) Five Pentacles consecrated to Venus = Green. 

(6.) Five Pentacles consecrated to Mercury = Mixed Colours. 


(7.) Six Pentacles consecrated to the Moon = Silver. 


Editor's Note on Figure 1.--The Mystical Figure of Solomon.--This is only given in the two 
MSS., Lansdowne 1202and 1203. It was given by Lévi in his 'Dogme et Rituel de la Haute 
Magie,' and by Tycho Brahé in his 'Calendarium Naturale Марісит, but in each instance 
without the Hebrew words and letters, probably berause these were so mangled by illiterate 
transcribers as to be unrecognisable. After much labour and study of the figure, I believe the 
words in the body of the symbol to be intended for the Ten Sephiroth arranged in the form of the 
Tree of Life, with the Name of Solomon to the right and to the left; while the surrounding 
characters are intended for the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew Alphabet. I have, therefore, thus 
restored them. This Figure forms in each instance the frontispiece of the MS. referred to. 


PLATE Ш. 


Plate Ш. 


Figure 14.--The Fourth Pentacle of Saturn.--This Pentacle serveth principally for executing all 
the experiments and operations of ruin, destruction, and death. And when it is made in full 
perfection, it serveth also for those Spirits which bring news, when thou invokest them from the 
side of the South. 


p. 68 


Editor's Note.--The Hebrew words around the sides of the triangle are from Deut. Vi. 4:--'Hear, 

O Israel, ІНУН ALHINV is IHVH AChD.’ The surrounding versicle is from Psalm сіх. 18:--'As 
he clothed himself with cursing like as with a garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, 
and like oil into his bones.' In the centre of the Pentacle is the mystic letter Yod. 


Figure 15.--The Fifth Pentacle of Saturn.--This Pentacle defendeth those who invoke the Spirits 
of Saturn during the night; and chaseth away the Spirits which guard treasures. 


Editor's Note.--The Hebrew letters in the angles of the Cross are those of the Name IHVH. Those 
in the angles of the Square form ALVH, Eloah. Round the four sides of the Square are the 
Names of the Angels:--Arehanah, Rakhaniel, Roelhaiphar, and Noaphiel. The versicle is:--'A 
Great God, a Mighty, and a Terrible.'--Deut. x. 17. 


Figure 16.--The Sixth Pentacle of Saturn.--Around this Pentacle is each Name symbolised as it 
should be. The person against whom thou shalt pronounce it shall be obsessed by Demons. 


Editor's Note.--It is formed from Mystical Characters of Saturn. Around it is written in Hebrew: 
'Set thou a wicked one to be ruler over him, and let Satan stand at his right hand." 


Figure 17.--The Seventh and Last Pentacle of Saturn.--This Pentacle is fit for exciting 
earthquakes, seeing that the power of each order of Angels herein invoked is sufficient to make 
the whole Universe tremble. 


Editor's Note.--Within the Pentacle are the Names of the Nine Orders of Angels, those of six of 
them in ordinary Hebrew Characters, and the remainder in the letters which are known as 'The 
Passing of the River.' These Nine Orders are:--1. CHAIOTH HA-QADESCH, Holy Living 
Creatures; 2. AUPHANIM, Wheels; 3.ARALIM, Thrones; 4.CHASCHMALIM, Brilliant Ones; 
5.SERAPHIM, Fiery Ones; 6. MELAKIM, Kings; 7.ELOHIM, Gods; 8.ВЕМІ ELOHIM, Sons of 
the Elohim; 9. KERUBIM, Kerubim. The versicle is from Psalm xviii. 7:--'Then the earth shook 
and trembled, the foundations of the hills also moved and were shaken, because He was wroth.' 


PLATE ТҮ. 


PLATE IV. 


JUPITER. 


Figure 18.--The First Pentacle of Jupiter.--This serveth to invoke the Spirits of Jupiter, and 
especially those whose Names are written around the Pentacle, among whom Parasiel is the Lord 
and Master of Treasures, and teacheth how to become possessor of places wherein they are. 


Editor's Note.--This Pentacle is composed of Mystical Characters of Jupiter. Around it are the 
Names of the Angels:--Netoniel, Devachiah, Tzedeqiah, and Parasiel, written in Hebrew. 


Figure 19.--The Second Pentacle of Jupiter.--This is proper for acquiring glory, honours, 
dignities, riches, and all kinds of good, together with great tranquillity of mind; also to discover 
Treasures and chase away the Spirits who preside over them. It should be written upon virgin 
paper or parchment, with the pen of the swallow and the blood of the screech-owl. 


Editor's Note.--In the centre of the Hexagram are the letters of the Name AHIH, Eheieh; in the 

upper and lower angles of the same, those of the Name AB, the Father; in the remaining angles 
those of the Name IHVH. I believe the letters outside the Hexagram in the re-entering angles to 
be intended for those of the first two words of the versicle, which is taken from Psalm cxii. 3:-- 
"Wealth and Riches are in his house, and his righteousness endureth for ever. 


Figure 20.--The Third Pentacle of Jupiter.--This defendeth and protecteth those who invoke and 
cause the Spirits to come. When they appear show unto them this Pentacle, and immediately they 
will obey. 


Editor's Note.--In the upper left corner is the Magical Seal of Jupiter with the letters of the Name 
IHVH. In the others are the Seal of the Intelligence of Jupiter, and the Names Adonai and 
THVH.--Around it is the versicle from Psalm cxxv. 1:--'A Song of degrees. They that trust in 
IHVH shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth for ever.' 


Figure 21.--The Fourth Pentacle of Jupiter.--It serveth to acquire riches and honour, and to 
possess much wealth. Its Angel is Bariel. It should be engraved upon silver in the day and hour 
of Jupiter when he is in the Sign Cancer. 


p. 70 


Editor's Note.--Above the Magical Sigil is the Name IH, Iah. Below it are the Names of the 
Angels Adoniel and Bariel, the letters of the latter being arranged about a square of four 
compartments. Around is the versicle from Psalm cxii. 3:--'Wealth and Riches are in his house, 
and his righteousness endureth for ever." 


PLATE у. 


Fig. 23. 


PLATE V. 


Figure 22.--The Fifth Pentacle of Jupiter.--This hath great power. It serveth for assured visions. 
Jacob being armed with this Pentacle beheld the ladder which reached unto heaven. 


Editor's Note.--The Hebrew letters within the Pentacle are taken from the five last words of the 
versicle which surrounds it, each of which contains five letters. These are, then, recombined so 
as to form certain Mystical Names. The versicle is taken from Ezekiel i. 1:--' As I was among the 
captives by the river of Chebar, the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of Elohim.' In my 
opinion the versicle should only consist of the five last words thereof, when the anachronism of 
Jacob using a Pentacle with a sentence from Ezekiel will no longer exist. 


Figure 23.--The Sixth Pentacle of Jupiter.--It serveth for protection against all earthly dangers, by 
regarding it each day devoutedly, and repeating the versicle which surroundeth it. Thus shalt 
thou never perish. 


Editor's Note.--The four Names in the Arms of the Cross are Seraph, Kerub, Ariel, and Tharsis; 
the four Rulers of the Elements. The versicle is from Psalm xxii. 16, 17:-' They pierced my hands 
and my feet, I may tell all my bones." 


Figure 24.--The Seventh and last Pentacle of Jupiter.--It hath great power against poverty, if thou 
considerest it with devotion, repeating the versicle. It serveth furthermore to drive away those 
Spirits who guard treasures, and to discover the same. 


Editor's Note.--Mystical Characters of Jupiter with the verse:--'Lifting up the poor out of the 
mire, and raising the needy from the dunghill, that he may set him with princes, even with the 
princes of his people.'--Psalm cxiii, 7. 


p. 71 
MARS. 


Figure 25.--The first Pentacle of Mars.--It is proper for invoking Spirits of the Nature of Mars, 
especially those which are written in the Pentacle. 


Editor's Note.--Mystical Characters of Mars, and the Names of the four Angels:--Madimiel, 
Bartzachiah, Eschiel, and Ithuriel written in Hebrew around the Pentacle. 


` 
PLATE V1. 


PLATE VI. 


Figure 26.--The Second Pentacle of Mars.--This Pentacle serveth with great success against all 
kinds of diseases, if it be applied unto the afflicted part. 


Editor's Note.--The letter Hé, in the angles of the Hexagram. Within the same the Names IHVH, 
ІНЅНУН Yeheshuah (the mystic Hebrew Name for Joshua or Jesus, formed of the ordinary 
IHVH with the letter SH placed therein as emblematical of the Spirit), and Elohim. Around it is 
the sentence, John i. 4:--'In Him was life, and the life was the light of man.' This may be adduced 
as an argument of the greater antiquity of the first few mystical verses of the Gospel of St. John. 


Figure 27.--The Third Pentacle of Mars.--It is of great value for exciting war, wrath, discord, and 
hostility; also for resisting enemies, and striking terror into rebellious Spirits; the Names of God 
the All Powerful are therein expressly marked. 


Editor's Note.--The Letters of the Names Eloah and Shaddai. In the Centre is the great letter Vau, 
the signature of the Qabalistic Microprosopus. Around is the versicle from Psalm Ixxvii. 13:-- 
"Who is so great a God as our Elohim?" 


Figure 28.--The Fourth Pentacle of Mars.--It is of great virtue and power in war, wherefore 
without doubt it will give thee victory. 


Editor's Note.--In the Centre is the great Name Agla; right and left, the letters of the Name 
IHVH; above and below, El. Round it is the versicle from Psalm сх. 5:--'The Lord at thy right 
hand shall wound even Kings in the day of His Wrath.' 


Figure 29.--The Fifth Pentacle of Mars.--Write thou this Pentacle upon virgin parchment or 
paper, because it is terrible unto the Demons, 


р‹ 72 
and at its sight and aspect they will obey thee, for they cannot resist its presence. 
Editor's Note.--Around the figure of the Scorpion is the word HVL. The versicle is from Psalm 


xci. 13:--'Thou shalt go upon the lion and adder, the young lion and the dragon shalt thou tread 
under thy feet." 


PLATE VII. 


g- 31. 


Fu 


PLATE VII. 


Figure 30.--The Sixth Pentacle of Mars.--It hath so great virtue that being armed therewith, if 
thou art attacked by any one, thou shalt neither be injured nor wounded when thou fightest with 
him, and his own weapons shall turn against him. 


Editor's Note.--Around the eight points of the radii of the Pentacle are the words 'Elohim qeber, 
Elohim hath covered (or protected),' written in the Secret Alphabet of Malachim, or the writing 
of the Angels. The versicle is from Psalm xxxvii. 15:--'Their sword shall enter into their own 
heart, and their bow shall be broken." 


Figure 31.--The Seventh and last Pentacle of Mars.--Write thou this upon virgin parchment or 
paper with the blood of a bat, in the day and hour of Mars; and uncover it within the Circle, 
invoking the Demons whose Names are therein written; and thou shalt immediately see hail and 
tempest. 


Editor's Note.--In the centre of the Pentacle are the Divine Names, El and Yiai, which have the 
same numerical value when written in Hebrew. The Letters in Hebrew, and in the Secret 
Alphabet called the Celestial, compose the Names of Spirits. Round the Pentacle is:--'He gave 
them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land. He smote their vines also, and their fig-trees.'-- 
Psalm cv. 32, 33. 


THE SUN. 


Figure 32.--The First Pentacle of the Sun.--The Countenance of Shaddai the Almighty, at Whose 
aspect all creatures obey, and the Angelic Spirits do reverence on bended knees. 


Editor's Note.--This singular Pentacle contains the head of the great Angel Methraton or 
Metatron, the vice-gerent and representative of Shaddai, who is called the Prince of 
Countenances, and the right-hand masculine Cherub of the Ark, as Sandalphon is the left and 
feminine. On 


р: 73 


either side is the Name 'Е1 Shaddai.' Around is written in Latin:'Behold His face and form by 
Whom all things were made, and Whom all creatures obey." 


Figure 33.--The Second Pentacle of the Sun.--This Pentacle, and the preceding and following, 
belong to the nature of the Sun. They serve to repress the pride and arrogance of the Solar 
Spirits, which are altogether proud and arrogant by their nature. 


Editor's Note.--Mystical characters of the Sun and the Names of the Angels:--Shemeshiel, 
Paimoniah, Rekhodiah, and Malkhiel. 


PLATE VIIL. 


PLATE VIII. 


Figure 34.--The Third Pentacle of the Sun.--This serveth in addition (to the effects of the two 
preceding) to acquire Kingdom and Empire, to inflict loss, and to acquire renown and glory, 
especially through the Name of God, Tetragrammaton, which therein is twelve times contained. 


Editor's Note.--The Name IHVH, twelve times repeated; and a versicle somewhat similar to 
Daniel iv. 34:--'My Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, апа my dominion endureth from age 
unto age.’ 


Figure 35.--The Fourth Pentacle of the Sun.--This serveth to enable thee to see the Spirits when 
they appear invisible unto those who invoke them; because, when thou hast uncovered it, they 
will immediately appear visible. 


Editor's Note.--The Names IHVH, Adonai, are written in the centre in Hebrew; and round the 
radii in the mystical characters of the 'Passing of the River.' The versicle is from Psalm xiii. 3, 4:- 
-'Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death, lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him.' 


Figure 36.--The Fifth Pentacle of the Sun.--It serveth to invoke those Spirits who can transport 
thee from one place unto another, over a long distance and in short time. 


Editor's Note.--Characters in the 'Passing of the River' Alphabet, forming Spirits' Names. The 
versicle is from Psalm xci. 11, 12:--'He shall give His Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all 
thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands.' 


p. 74 


Figure 37.--The Sixth Pentacle of the Sun.--It serveth excellently for the operation of invisibility, 
when correctly made. 


Editor's Note.--In the centre is the Mystical letter Yod, in the Celestial Alphabet. The three 
letters in the 'Passing of the River' writing, in the Angles of the triangle, form the great Name 
Shaddai. The words in the same characters round its three sides аге, in my opinion, from Genesis 
1. 1:--'In the beginning the Elohim created,’ etc.; but the characters are sadly mangled in the 
MSS. The versicle is from Psalms Ixix. 23, and cxxxv. 16:--'Let their eyes be darkened that they 
see not and make their loins continually to shake. They have eyes and see not. 


PLATE IX. 


PLATE IX. 


Figure 38.--The Seventh and last Pentacle of the Sun.--If any be by chance imprisoned or 
detained in fetters of iron, at the presence of this Pentacle, which should be engraved in Gold on 
the day and hour of the Sun, he will be immediately delivered and set at liberty. 


Editor's Note.--On the Arms of the Cross are written the Names of Chasan, Angel of Air; Arel, 
Angel of Fire; Phorlakh, Angel of Earth; and Taliahad, Angel of Water. Between the four Arms 
of the Cross are written the names of the four Rulers of the Elements: Ariel, Seraph, Tharshis, 
and Cherub. The versicle is from Psalm cxvi. 16, 17:--'Thou hast broken my bonds in sunder. I 
will offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name of IHVH.' 


VENUS. 


Figure 39.--The First Pentacle of Venus.--This and those following serve to control the Spirits of 
Venus, and especially those herein written. 


Editor's Note.--Mystical Characters of Venus, and the Names of the Angels: Nogahiel, Acheliah, 
Socodiah (or Socohiah) and Nangariel. 


Figure 40.--The Second Pentacle of Venus.--These Pentacles are also proper for obtaining grace 
and honour, and for all things which belong unto Venus, and for accomplishing all thy desires 
herein. 


Editor's Note.--The letters round and within the Pentagram form the Names of Spirits of Venus. 
The versicle is from Canticles viii. 6:--'Place me as a signet upon thine heart, as a signet upon 
thine arm, for love is strong as death.' 


р. 75 


Figure 41.--The Third Pentacle of Venus.--This, if it be only shown unto any person, serveth to 
attract love. Its Angel Monachiel should be invoked in the day and hour of Venus, at one o'clock 
or at eight. 


Editor's Note.--The following Names are written within the Figure IHVH, Adonai, Ruach, 
Achides, Ægalmiel, Monachiel, and Degaliel. The versicle is from Genesis i. 28:--'And the 
Elohim blessed them, and the Elohim said unto them, Be ye fruitful, and multiply, and replenish 
the earth, and subdue it.' 


PLATEX., 


OME SSN 


©: 
< 
ЕІ SS |" 


PLATE X. 


Figure 42.--The Fourth Pentacle of Venus.--It is of great power, since it compels the Spirits of 
Venus to obey, and to force on the instant any person thou wishest to come unto thee. 


Editor's Note.--At the four Angles of the Figure are the four letters of the Name IHVH. The other 
letters form the Names of Spirits of Venus, e.g.:--Schii, Eli, Ayib, etc. The versicle is from 
Genesis ii. 23, 24:--'This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. And they two were one 
flesh." 


Figure 43.--The Fifth and last Pentacle of Venus.--When it is only showed unto any person 
soever, it inciteth and exciteth wonderfully unto love. 


Editor's Note.--Around the central Square arc the Names Elohim, ЕІ Gebil, and two other Names 
which I cannot decipher, and have, therefore, given them as they stand. The characters are those 
of the 'Passing of the River.' The surrounding versicle is from Psalm xxii. 14:--' Му heart is like 
wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels.’ 


MERCURY. 


Figure 44.--The First Pentacle of Mercury.--It serveth to invoke the Spirits who are under the 
Firmament. 


Editor's Note.--Letters forming the Names of the Spirits Yekahel and Agiel. 


Figure 45.--The Second Pentacle of Mercury.--The Spirits herein written serve to bring to effect 
and to grant things which are contrary unto the order of Nature; and which are not contained 
under any other head. They easily give answer, but they can with difficulty be seen. 


p. 76 


Editor's Note.--The Letters form the Names of Boel and other Spirits. 


PLATE X1. 


rape тё": کے‎ 
даф Б" 


PLATE ХІ. 


Figure 46.--The Third Pentacle of Mercury.--This and the following serve to invoke the Spirits 
subject unto Mercury; and especially those who are written in this Pentacle. 


Editor's Note.--Mystical Characters of Mercury, and the Names of the Angels: Kokaviel, 
Ghedoriah, Savaniah, and Chokmahiel. 


Figure 47.--The Fourth Pentacle of Mercury.--This is further proper to acquire the understanding 
and Knowledge of all things created, and to seek out and penetrate into hidden things; and to 
command those Spirits which are called Allatori to perform embassies. They obey very readily. 


Editor's Note.--In the centre is the Name of God, El. The Hebrew letters inscribed about the 
dodecagram make the sentence, 'THVH, fix Thou the Volatile, and let there be unto the void 
restriction.' The versicle is:--'Wisdom and virtue are in his house, and the Knowledge of all 
things remaineth with him for ever. 


Figure 48.--The Fifth and Last Pentacle of Mercury.--This commandeth the Spirits of Mercury, 
and serveth to open doors in whatever way they may be closed, and nothing it may encounter can 
resist it. 


Editor's Note.--Within the Pentacle are the Names ЕІ Ab, and IHVH. The versicle is from Psalm 
xxiv. 7:--'Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of 
Glory shall come in.' 


THE MOON. 


Figure 49.--The First Pentacle of the Moon.--This and the following serve to call forth and 
invoke the Spirits of the Moon; and it further serveth to open doors, in whatever way they may 
be fastened. 


Editor's Note.--The Pentacle is a species of hieroglyphic representation of a door or gate. In the 
centre is written the Name IHVH. On the right hand are the Names ІНУ, IHVH, AL, and ІНН. 
On the left hand are the Names of the Angels: Schioel, Vaol, Yashiel, and Vehiel. The versicle 
above the Names on either side is from Psalm cvii. 16:--'He hath broken the Gates of brass, and- 
smitten the bars of iron in sunder.' 


Pare Xûl. 


wal fig. $3. 


PLATE ХП. 


Figure 50.--The Second Pentacle of the Moon.--This serveth against all perils and dangers by 
water, and if it should chance that the Spirits of the Moon should excite and cause great rain and 
exceeding tempests about the Circle, in order to astonish and terrify thee; on showing unto them 
this Pentacle, it will all speedily cease. 


Editor's Note.--A hand pointing to the Name ЕІ, and to that of the Angel Abariel. The versicle is 
from Psalm lvi. ii:--'In Elohim have I put my trust, I will not fear, what сап man do unto me 


Figure 51.--The Third Pentacle of the Moon.--This being duly borne with thee when upon a 
journey, if it be properly made, serveth against all attacks by night, and against every kind of 
danger and peril by Water. 


Editor's Note.--The Names Aub and Vevaphel. The versicle is from Psalm xl. 13:--'Be pleased О 
IHVH to deliver те, О IHVH make haste to help me." 


Figure 52.--The Fourth Pentacle of the Moon.--This defendeth thee from all evil sorceries, and 
from all injury unto soul or body. Its Angel, Sophiel, giveth the knowledge of the virtue of all 
herbs and stones; and unto whomsoever shall name him, he will procure the knowledge of all. 


Editor's Note.--The Divine Name Eheieh Asher Eheieh, and the Names of the Angels Yahel and 
Sophiel. The versicle is:--'Let them be confounded who persecute me, and let me not be 
confounded; let them fear,and not І. 


Figure 53.--The Fifth Pentacle of the Moon.--It serveth to have answers in sleep. Its Angel 
Iachadiel serveth unto destruction and loss, as well as unto the destruction of enemies. Thou 
mayest also call upon him by Abdon and Dale against all Phantoms of the night, and to summon 
the souls of the departed from Hades. 


Editor's Note.--The Divine Names IHVH and Elohim, a mystical character of the Moon, and the 
Names of the Angels Iachadiel and Azarel. The versicle is from Psalm Ixviii. 1:--'Let God arise, 
and let His enemies be scattered; let them also who hate Him flee before Him." 


Figure 54--The Sixth and Last Pentacle of the Moon.--This is wonderfully good, and serveth 
excellently to excite and cause heavy rains, if it be engraved upon a plate of silver; and if it be 
placed under water, 


p. 78 


as long as it remaineth there, there will be rain. It should be engraved, drawn, or written in the 
day and hour of the Moon. 


Editor's Note.--The Pentacle is composed of mystical characters of the Moon, surrounded by a 
versicle from Genesis vii. 11, 12:--'All the fountains of the great deep were broken up . . . and the 
rain was upon the earth." 


[This is the end of the Holy Pentacles, in all which I have, to the best of my power, restored the Hebrew letters and 
mystical characters correctly. I have further given nearly every versicle in pointed Hebrew, instead of in the Latin; 
so that the Occult student might not be inconvenienced by having to search out the same in a Hebrew Bible. The 
restoration of the Hebrew letters in the body of the Pentacles has been a work of immense difficulty, and has 
extended over several years. } 


Book II 


Prefatory Note 

Chapter I. 

Chapter П. In What Manner the Master of the Art Should Keep, Rule, And Govern Himself 
Chapter Ш. 

Chapter IV. Concerning the Fasting, Care, And Things To Be Observed 

Chapter V. Concerning the Baths, And How They Are To Be Arranged 

Chapter VI. Of the Garments And Shoes of the Art 

Chapter VII. Of Places Wherein We May Conveniently Execute the Experiments And 
Operations of the Art 

Chapter УШ. Of the Knife, Sword, Sickle, Poniard, Dagger, Lance, Wand, Staff, And Other 
Instruments of Magical Art 

Chapter IX. Of the Formation of the Circle 

Chapter X. Concerning Incense, Suffumigations, Perfumes, Odours, And Similar Things Which 
Are Used In Magical Arts 

Chapter XI.Of the Water, And of the Hyssop 

Chapter XII.Of the Light, And of the Fire 

Chapter ХШ.Сопсегпіпо the Precepts of the Art 

Chapter XIV. Of the Pen, Ink, And Colours 

Chapter XV. Of the Pen of the Swallow And of the Crow 

Chapter XVI. Of the Blood of the Bat, Pigeon, And Other Animals 

Chapter ХУП. Of Virgin Parchment, Or Virgin Paper, And How It Should Be Prepared 
Chapter ХУШ. Of Wax And Virgin Earth 

Chapter XIX. Concerning the Needle And Other Iron Instruments 

Chapter XX. Concerning the Silken Cloth 

Chapter XXI.Concerning Characters, And the Consecration of the Magical Book 

Chapter XXII. Concerning Sacrifices To the Spirits, And How They Should Be Made 


BOOK II 
PREFATORY NOTE , 


THIS Work of Solomon is divided into two books. In the first thou mayest see and know how to 
avoid errors in Experiments, Operations, and in the Spirits themselves. In the second thou art 
taught in what manner Magical Arts may be reduced to the proposed object and end. 


It is for this reason that thou shouldest take great heed and care that this Key of Secrets fall not 
into the hands of the foolish, the stupid, and the ignorant. For he who is the possessor hereof, and 
who availeth himself hereof according to the ordinances herein contained, will not only be able 
to reduce the Magical Arts herein unto their proposed end, but will, even if he findeth certain 
errors herein, be able to correct them. 


Any Art or Operation of this kind will not be able to attain its end, unless the Master of the Art, 
or Exorcist, shall have this Work completely in his power, that is to say, unless he thoroughly 
understand it, for without this he will never attain the effect of any operation. 


For this reason I earnestly pray and conjure the person into whose hands this Key of Secrets may 
fall, neither to communicate it, nor to make any one a partaker in this knowledge, if he be not 
faithful, nor capable of keeping a secret, nor expert in the Arts. And I most humbly entreat the 
possessor of this, by the Ineffable Name of God in four Letters, YOD, HE, VAU, HE, and by the 
Name ADONAI, and by all the other Most High and Holy Names of God, that he values this 
work as dearly as his own soul, and that he makes no foolish or ignorant man a partaker therein. 


Footnotes 


79:1 This Prefatory Note is only found in 3991 Harleian MSS., 3091 Sloane MSS., and 288 
King's MSS. 


CHAPTER I 


AT WHAT HOUR AFTER THE PREPARATION OF ALL THINGS 
NECESSARY, WE SHOULD BRING THE EXERCISE OF THE ART TO 
PERFECTION 


THE Days and Hours have already been treated of, in general, in the First Book. It is now 
necessary to notice in particular at what hour accomplishment and perfection should be given to 
the Arts, all things necessary having been previously prepared. 


Should it then happen that thou hast undertaken any secret operation for conversing with or 
conjuring Spirits, in which the day and the hour are not marked, thou shalt put it in execution on 
the days and hours of Mercury, at the sixteenth or twenty-third hour, but it will be still better at 
the eighth, which is the third 1 of the same night, which is called and means before the morning, 
for then thou shalt be able to put in practice all the Arts and Operations which should be 
performed, according as it shall please thee by day or by night, provided that they have been 
prepared at the hours suitable to them, as hath been already said. But when neither hour nor time 
of operation or invocation is specified, it is then much better to perform these experiments at 
night, seeing that it is more easy to the Spirits to appear in the peaceful silence of night than 
during the day. And thou shouldest inviolably observe, that wishing to invoke the Spirits, either 
by day or by night, it is necessary that it should be done in а place hidden, removed, secret, 
convenient, and proper for such Art, where no man frequenteth or inhabiteth, as we shall relate 
more fully in its place. 


If then thou shouldest operate touching anything which hath been stolen, in whatever way it be 
performed and whatever way it may have been prepared, it is necessary to practise it on the days 
and hours of the Moon, being if possible in her increase, and from the first unto the eighth hour 
of the day. 


But if it be by night, then it should be at the fifth or at the third 


р. 81 


hour; but it is better by day than by the night, for the light justifieth them, and maketh them much 
more fit for publication. 


But if the Operations be regarding Invisibility, they should be put in practice at the first, second, 
and third hour of Mars by day. But if by night, until the third hour. 


If they be Operations of seeking love, grace, or favour, they should be performed until the eighth 
hour of the same day, commencing with the first hour of the Sun; and from the first hour of 
Venus unto the first hour of the same day of Venus. 


As for Operations of destruction and desolation, we should practise and put them into execution 
on the day of Saturn at the first hour, or rather at the eighth or fifteenth of the day; and from the 
first until the eighth hour of the night. 


Experiments of games, raillery, deceit, illusion, and invisibility, ought to be done at the first hour 
of Venus, and at the eighth hour of the day but by night at the third and at the seventh. 


At all times of practising and putting into execution Magical Arts, the Moon should be increasing 
in light, and in an equal number of degrees with the Sun; and it is much better from the first 
quarter to the Opposition, and the Moon should be in a fiery Sign, and notably in that of the Ram 
or of the Lion. 


Therefore, to execute these Experiments in any manner whatsoever, it should be done when the 
Moon is clear, and when she is increasing in light. 


In order to put in execution those of Invisibility after everything is properly prepared, the Moon 
should be in the Sign of the Fishes, in the hours proper and fitting, and she should be increasing 
in light. 


For experiments of seeking love and favour, in whatever way it may be desired, they will 
succeed, provided that they have been prepared at the proper hours, and that the Moon be 
increasing in light and in the Sign of the Twins. 


So exact a preparation of days and hours is not necessary for those who are adepts in the Art, but 
it is extremely necessary for apprentices and beginners, seeing that those who have been little or 
not at all instructed herein, and who only begin to apply themselves to this Art, do not have as 
much faith in the experiments as those who are adepts therein, and who have practised them. But 
as regards beginners, they should always have the days and hours well disposed and appropriate 
unto the Art. And the Wise should only observe the precepts of the Art which are necessary, and 
in observing the other solemnities necessary they will operate with a perfect assurance. 


It is, nevertheless, necessary to take care that when thou shalt have 

p. 82 

prepared any experiment thyself for the days and hours ordained, that it should be performed in 
clear, serene, mild, and pleasant weather, without any great tempest or agitation of the air, which 
should not be troubled by winds. For when thou shalt have conjured any Spirits in any art or 
experiment, they will not come when the air is troubled or agitated by winds, seeing that Spirits 
have neither flesh nor bones, and are created of different substances. 

Some are created from Water. 

Others from Wind, unto which they are like. 

Some from Earth. 


Some from Clouds. 


Others from Solar Vapours. 


Others from the keenness and strength of Fire; and when they are invoked or summoned, they 
come always with great noise, and with the terrible nature of fire. 


When the Spirits which are created of Water are invoked, they come with great rains, thunder, 
hail, lightning, thunder-bolts, and the like. 


When the Spirits which are created of Clouds are invoked, they come with great deformity, in a 
horrible form, to strike fear into the Invocator, and with an exceeding great noise. 


Others 1 which are formed from Wind appear like thereunto and with exceeding swift motion, 
and whensoever those which are created from Beauty 2 appear, they will show themselves in a 
fair and agreeable form; moreover, whensoever thou shalt call the Spirits created from Air, they 
will come with a kind of gentle breeze. 


When the Spirits which are created from the Vapours of the Sun are invoked, they come under a 
very beautiful and excellent form, but filled with pride, vanity, and conceit. They are clever, 
whence it comes that these last are all specified by Solomon in his book of ornament, or of 
beauty. They show great ostentation and vainglory in their dress, and they rejoice in many 
ornaments; they boast of possessing mundane beauty, and all sorts of ornaments and decorations. 
Thou shalt only invoke them in serene, mild, and pleasant weather. 


The Spirits 3 which are created of Fire reside in the cast, those created of Wind in the south. 


Note then that it will be much better to perform the experiments or operations in the direction of 
the east, putting everything necessary in practice towards that point. 


But for all other operations or extraordinary experiments, and for 


p. 83 
those of love, they will be much more efficacious directed towards the north. 


Take heed further, that every time that thou performest any experiment, to reduce it unto 
perfection with the requisite solemnities, thou shalt recommence the former experiment if 
interrupted therein, without the preparation of hours or other solemnities: 


If by chance it should happen that having performed an experiment with due observance of days, 
hours, and requisite solemnities, thou shalt find it unsuccessful, it must be in some manner false, 
ill-arranged and defective, and thou must assuredly have failed in some matter; for if thou doest 
ill in one single point, these experiments or these Arts will not be verified. 


Thus upon this Chapter dependeth this whole Key of Arts, Experiments, and Operations, and 
although every solemnity be rightly observed, no experiment will be verified, unless thou canst 
penetrate the meaning of this Chapter. 


Footnotes 
80:1 In 10862 Add. MSS. it says 'the second." 


82:1 This paragraph is only found in 10862 Add. MSS. 


82:2 The Name of the Sixth Qabalistical Sephira or Emanation from the Deity, which is called 
Tiphereth, or Beauty. 


82:3 I have usually found it said exactly vice versa. 


CHAPTER II 


IN WHAT MANNER THE MASTER OF THE ART SHOULD KEEP, RULE, 
AND GOVERN HIMSELF 


HE who wisheth to apply himself unto so great and so difficult a Science should have his mind 
free from all business, and from all extraneous ideas of whatever nature they may be. 


He should then thoroughly examine the Art or Operation which he should undertake, and write it 
regularly out on paper, particularly set aside for that purpose, with the appropriate conjurations 
and exorcisms. If there be anything to mark or write down, it should be performed in the manner 
specified regarding the paper, ink, and pen. He should also observe at what day and at what hour 
this Experiment should be undertaken, and what things are necessary to prepare for it, what 
should be added, and what can be dispensed with. 


The which matters being prepared, it is necessary for thee to search out and arrange some fitting 
place wherein the Magical Art and its Experiments can be put in practice. All these things being 
thus arranged and disposed, let the Master of the Art go into a proper and fitting place, or into his 
Cabinet or Secret Chamber if it be convenient for the purpose, and he can there dispose and set 
in order the whole operation; or he can use any other convenient secret place for the purpose, 
provided that no one knoweth where it is, and that no man can see him when there. 


After this he must strip himself entirely naked, and let him have a bath ready prepared, wherein 
is water exorcised, after the manner which we shall describe, so that he may bathe and purify 
himself therein from the crown of his head unto the sole of his foot, saying:-- 


О Lord ADONAI, Who hast formed me Thine unworthy servant in Thine Image and 
resemblance of vile and of abject earth; deign to bless and to sanctify this Water, so that it may 
be for the health and purification of my sotd, and of my body, so that no foolishness or 
deceitfulness may therein in any way have place. 


O Most Powerful and Ineffable God, Who madest Thy people pass 


p. 85 


dryshod through the Red Sea when they came up out of the Land of Egypt, grant unto me grace 
that I may be purified and regenerated from all my past sins by this Water, that so no 
uncleanness may appear upon me in Thy Presence. 


After this thou shalt entirely immerse thyself in the Water, and thou shalt dry thyself with a towel 
of clean white linen, and then thou shalt put upon thy flesh the garments of pure white linen 
whereof we shall speak hereafter. 


Hereafter, for three days at least, thou shalt abstain from all idle, vain, and impure reasonings, 
and from every kind of impurity and sin, as will be shown in the Chapter of fast and of vigil. 
Each day shalt thou recite the following prayer, at least once in the morning, twice about noon, 


thrice in the afternoon, four times in the evening, and five times before lying down to sleep; this 
shalt thou do on the three ensuing days:-- 


THE PRAYER. 


HERACHIO, ASAC, ASACRO, BEDRIMULAEL, TILATH, ARABONAS, IERAHLEM, 
IDEODOC, ARCHARZEL, ZOPHIEL, BLAUTEL, BARACATA, EDONIEL, ELOHIM, 
EMAGRO, ABRAGATEH, SAMOEL, GEBURAHEL, CADATO, ERA, ELOHI, ACHSAH, 
EBMISHA, IMACHEDEL, DANIEL, DAMA, ELAMOS, IZACHEL, BAEL, SEGON, 
GEMON, DEMAS. 


O Lord God, Who art seated upon the Heavens, and Who regardest the Abysses beneath, grant 
unto me Thy Grace I beseech Thee, so that what I conceive in my mind I may accomplish in my 
work, through Thee, O God, the Sovereign Ruler of all, Who livest and reignest unto the Ages of 
the Ages. Amen. 


These three days having passed, thou must have all things in readiness, as hath been said, and 
after this a day appointed and set apart. It will be necessary for thee to wait for the hour in which 
thou shouldest commence the Operation; but when once it shall be commenced at this hour, thou 
shalt be able to continue it unto the end, seeing that it deriveth its force and virtue from its 
beginning, which extendeth to and spreadeth over the succeeding hours, so that the Master of the 
Art will be enabled to complete his work so as to arrive at the desired result. 


CHAPTER III 


HOW THE COMPANIONS OR DISCIPLES OF THE MASTER OF THE ART 
OUGHT TO REGULATE AND GOVERN THEMSELVES 


WHEN the Master of the Art wisheth to put in practice any Operation or Experiment, especially 
one of importance, he should first consider of what Companions he should avail himself. This is 
the reason why in every Operation whose Experience should be carried out in the Circle, it is 
well to have three Companions. And if he cannot have Companions, he should at least have with 
him a faithful and attached dog. But if it be absolutely necessary for him to have Companions, 
these Companions should be obligated and bound by oath to do all that the Master shall order 
and prescribe them, and they should study, observe, and carefully retain, and be attentive unto all 
which they shall hear. For those who shall act otherwise shall suffer and endure many pains and 
labours, and run into many dangers, which the Spirits will cause and procure for them, and for 
this cause sometimes they shall even die. 


The Disciples then, being well and thoroughly instructed, and fortified with a wise and 
understanding heart, the Master shall take exorcised water, and he shall enter with his Disciples 
into a secret place purified and clean, where he must strip them entirely naked; after this, let him 
pour exorcised water upon their heads, which he should cause to flow from the crown of their 
head unto the sole of their feet, so as to bathe them entirely therewith; and while bathing them 
thus, he should say:-- 


Be ye regenerate, cleansed, and purified, in the Name of the Ineffable, Great, and Eternal God, 
from all your iniquities, and may the virtue of the Most High descend upon you and abide with 
you always, so that ye may have the power and strength to accomplish the desires of your heart. 
Amen. 


After this let the Disciples robe themselves as the Master hath done, and fast like him for three 
days, repeating the same prayer; let them act like him, and in the work let them implicitly follow 
and obey him in all things. 


p. 87 


But if the Master of the Art wisheth to have a dog for his Companion, he must bathe him 
thoroughly with the exorcised water in the same manner as the Disciples, and let him perfume 
him with the odours and incense of Art, and let him repeat the following Conjuration over him:-- 


I conjure thee, O thou Creature, being a Dog, by Him Who hath created thee, I bathe and I 
perfume thee in the Name of the Most High, Most Powerful, and Eternal God, so that thou 
mayest be my true Companion in this operation, and that thou mayest be also my faithful friend 
in whatsoever operation I may hereafter perform. 


But if he wisheth to have for his companion a little boy or girl, which will be still better, he must 
ordain them as he hath ordained the dog; and he must pare and cut the nails of their hands and of 
their feet, saying:-- 


I conjure thee, O thou Creature, being a young girl (or boy), by the Most High God, the Father of 
all Creatures, by the Father ADONAI ELOHIM, and by the Father ELION, that thou shalt have 
neither will nor power to hide from me anything, nor yet to keep back from me the truth in all 
which I shall demand of thee, and that thou be obedient and faithful unto me. Amen. 


Let him purify, cleanse, and wash this young child anew, with the Water of Art, saying:-- 


Be thou regenerate, cleansed, and purified, so that the Spirits may neither harm thee nor abide in 
thee. Amen. 


Then perfume the child with odours as above. 


When the Companions shall be thus ordained and disposed, the Master shall be able to operate in 
surety together with them, every time that it shall please him; and he shall perform his operation 
happily, and shall attain his end. 


But for the safety both of soul and of body, the Master and the Companions should have the 
Pentacles before their breasts, consecrated, and covered with a silken veil, and perfumed with the 
proper fumigations. By the which being assured and encouraged, they may enter into the matter 
without fear or terror, and they shall be exempt and free from all perils and dangers, provided 
that they obey the commands of the Master and do all that he ordain them. If they shall act thus, 
all things shall go according unto their desires. 


All being thus arranged, the Master should take heed that His Disciples are perfectly instructed in 
those things which they have to perform. 


These Companions or Disciples should be three in number, without including the Master. They 
may also be of the number of five, of seven, or of nine; but so that they ever implicitly obey the 
orders of their Master; for thus only shall all things come to a successful issue. 


CHAPTER IV 


CONCERNING THE FASTING, CARE, AND THINGS TO BE OBSERVED 


WHEN the Master of the Art shall wish to perform his operations, having previously arranged all 
things which it is necessary to observe and practise; from the first day of the Experiment, it is 
absolutely necessary to ordain and to prescribe care and observation, to abstain from all things 
unlawful, and from every kind of impiety, impurity, wickedness, or immodesty, as well of body 
as of soul; as, for example, eating and drinking superabundantly, and all sorts of vain words, 
buffooneries, slanders, calumnies, and other useless discourse; but instead to do good deeds, 
speak honestly, keep a strict decency in all things, never lose sight of modesty in walking, in 
conversation, in eating and drinking, and in all things; the which should be principally done and 
observed for nine days, before the commencement of the Operation. The Disciples should do the 
same, and should equally put in practice all things necessary to be observed, if they wish to make 
use of all these operations and experiments. 


But before the commencement of the work, it is absolutely necessary that the Master with his 
Disciples repeat the following Conjuration once in the morning, and twice in the evening:-- 


THE CONJURATION. 


O Lord God Almighty, be propitious unto me a miserable sinner, for I am not worthy to raise 
mine eyes unto heaven, because of the iniquity of my sins and the multitude of my faults. O 
pitying and merciful Father, who wouldest not the death of a sinner but rather that he should turn 
from his wickedness and live, O God have mercy upon me and pardon all my sins; for I 
unworthy entreat Thee, O Father of all Creatures, Thou Who art full of mercy and of 
compassion, by Thy great goodness, that Thou deign to grant unto me power to see and know 
these Spirits which I desire to behold and to invoke to appear before me and to 


p. 89 


accomplish my will. Through Thee Who art Conqueror, and Who art Blessed unto the Ages of 
the Ages. Amen. 


O Lord God the Father Eternal, Who art seated upon the Kerubim and the Seraphim, Who 
lookest upon Earth and upon Sea; unto Thee do I raise my hands and implore Thine aid alone, 
Thou Who alone art the accomplishment of good works, Thou Who givest rest unto those who 
labour, Who humblest the proud, Who art the Author of Life and the Destroyer of Death; Thou 
art our rest, Thou art the Protector of those who invoke Thee; protect, guard, and defend me in 
this matter, and in this enterprise which I propose to carry out, O Thou Who livest, reignest, and 
abidest unto the Eternal Ages. Amen. 


During the three last days before the commencement of this action, thou shalt content thyself 
with only eating fasting diet, and that only once in the day; and it will be better still if thou only 
partakest of bread and water. Thou shalt also abstain from every impure thing; reciting the prayer 
above written. And on the last day, when thou shalt wish to commence the Operation, thou shalt 


remain all day without eating, and later on thou shalt go into a secret place, where thou shalt 
confess all thy sins unto God with a contrite heart. The Disciples also, together with the Master, 
shall recite the same confession with a low but distinct voice, as hath been already said in the 
First Book. 


This having been done thrice with a devout, pure, and contrite heart, in a place withdrawn from 
men, cleansed, and pure, where thou canst not be seen, taking the water and the hyssop, thou 
shalt say:-- 


Purify me, О Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be pure; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 


After this, bathe thyself with the exorcised water, and clothe thyself again with the consecrated 
garment which thou hast taken off; cerise thyself, and surround thyself with odours, as will be 
told farther on, when we speak of perfumes and suffumigations. 


The which being done, thou shalt go unto the ordained place with thy Companions, and all things 
being prepared, thou shalt make the Circle, as hath been already said, with all other necessary 
ceremonies; then shalt thou commence to invoke the Spirits by the Exorcisms; thou shalt also 
repeat anew the foregoing Confession as hath been already said in the First Book. After which, in 
sign of amendment and of repentance, each shall mutually kiss the other. 


Mark well, that up to this point, the Disciples should do the same things as the Master. 


Let the Master now give his commands unto his Disciples, and pursue the course of the 
Experiment, and work with all diligence to bring it unto perfection. 


CHAPTER V 


CONCERNING THE BATHS, AND HOW THEY ARE TO BE ARRANGED 


THE Bath is necessary for all Magical and Necromantic Arts; wherefore, if thou wishest to 
perform any experiment or operation, having arranged all things necessary thereunto according 
to the proper days and hours, thou shalt go unto a river or running stream, or thou shalt have 
warm water ready in some large vessel or tub in thy secret cabinet, and while disrobing thyself of 
thy raiment thou shalt repeat the following Psalms:--Psalms xiv. or ш.; xxvit.; liv.; Ixxx1.; cv. 


And when the Master shall be entirely disrobed let him enter into the water or into the Bath, and 
let him say:-- 


THE EXORCISM OF THE WATER. 


I exorcise thee, O Creature of Water, by Him Who hath created thee and gathered thee together 
into one place so that the dry land appeared, that thou uncover all the deceits of the Enemy, and 
that thou cast out from thee all the impurities and uncleannesses of the Spirits of the World of 
Phantasm, so they may harm me not, through the virtue of God Almighty Who liveth and 
reigneth unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


Then shalt thou begin to wash thyself thoroughly in the Bath, saying:-- 


MERTALIA, MUSALIA, DOPHALIA, ONEMALIA, ZITANSEIA, GOLDAPHAIRA, 
DEDULSAIRA, GHEVIALAIRA, GHEMINAIRA, GEGROPHEIRA, CEDAHI, GILTHAR, 
GODIEB, EZOIIL, MUSIL, GRASSIL, TAMEN, PUERI, GODU, HUZNOTH, ASTACHOTH, 
TZABAOTH, ADONAI, AGLA, ON, EL, TETRAGRAMMATON, SHEMA, ARESION, 
ANAPHAXETON, SEGILATON, PRIMEUMATON. 


All the which Names thou shalt repeat twice or thrice, until thou art completely washed and 
clean, and when thou are perfectly pure thou shalt quit the Bath, and sprinkle thyself with 
exorcised water, in the manner described later on, and thou shalt say:-- 


р. 91 


Purge те, О Lord, with hyssop, апа І shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 


Whilst again clothing thyself, thou shalt recite the following Psalms: Psalms cii.; li.; iv.; xxx.; 
cxix., Mem, у. 97; cxiv.; CXXVİ.; CXXXIX. 


After which thou shalt recite the following Prayer:-- 
PRAYER. 


EL Strong and Wonderful, I bless Thee, I adore Thee, I glorify Thee, I invoke Thee, I render 
Thee thanks from this Bath, so that this Water may be able to cast from me all impurity and 


concupiscence of heart, through Thee, О Holy ADONAI; and may I accomplish all things 
through Thee Who livest and reignest unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


After this take the Salt and bless it in this manner:-- 


THE BENEDICTION OF THE SALT. 
The Blessing of the Father Almighty be upon this Creature of Salt, and let all malignity and 
hindrance be cast forth hence from, and let all good enter herein, for without Thee man cannot 
live, wherefore I bless thee and invoke thee, that thou mayest aid me. 


Then thou shalt recite over the Salt Psalm ciii. 


Then taking the grains of the exorcised Salt thou shalt cast them into the aforesaid Bath; and thou 
shalt again disrobe thyself, pronouncing the following words:-- 


IMANEL, ARNAMON, IMATO, MEMEON, RECTACON, МООВОП, PALTELLON, 
DECAION, YAMENTON, YARON, TATONON, VAPHORON, GARDON, EXISTON, 
ZAGVERON, MOMERTON, ZARMESITON, TILEION, TIXMION. 

After this thou shalt enter a second time into the Bath and recite Psalms civ. and lxxxi. 

Then thou shalt quit the Bath and clothe thyself as before in linen garments clean and white, and 
over them thou shalt put the garments, of which we shall speak in the proper Chapter, and thus 
clothed thou shalt go to finish thy work. 


The Disciples should wash themselves in like manner, and with like solemnities. 


CHAPTER VI 


OF THE GARMENTS AND SHOES OF THE ART 


THE exterior habiliments which the Master of the Art should wear ought to be of linen, as well 
as those which he weareth beneath them; and if he hath the means they should be of Silk. If they 
be of linen the thread of which they are made should have been spun by a young maiden. 


The characters shown in Figure 55 should be embroidered on the breast with the needle of Art in 
red silk. 


The shoes should also be White, upon the which the characters in Figure 56 should be traced in 
the same way. 


The shoes or boots should be made of white leather, on the which should be marked the Signs 
and Characters of Art. These shoes should be made during the days of fast and abstinence, 
namely, during the nine days set apart before the beginning of the Operation, during which the 
necessary instruments also should be prepared, polished, brightened, and cleaned. 


Besides this, the Master of the Art should have a Crown made of virgin paper, upon the which 
should be written these four Names: YOD, HE, VAU, HE, in front; ADONAI behind; EL on the 
right; and ELOHIM on the left. (See Figure 57.) These Names should be written with the ink and 
pen of the Art, whereof we shall speak in the proper Chapter. The Disciples should also each 
have a Crown of virgin paper whereon these Divine symbols should be marked in scarlet. (See 


Figure 58.) 


Take heed also that in clothing thyself with these aforesaid habiliments, that thou recite these 
Psalms:--Psalms xv.; сххх1.; схххуп.; CXVIi.; Ixvii.; Ixviii., and cxxvil. 


After this perfume the vestments with the perfumes and suffumigations of the Art, and sprinkle 
them with the water and hyssop of the Art. 


But when the Master and His Disciples shall commence to robe themselves after the first Psalm, 
and before continuing with the others, he should pronounce these words:-- 


р; 93 


AMOR, AMATOR, AMIDES, IDECIDANIACH, PAMOR, PLAIOR, ANITOR; through the 
merits of these holy Angels will I robe and indue myself with the Vestments of Power, through 
which may I conduct unto the desired end those things which I ardently wish, through Thee, O 
Most Holy ADONAI, Whose Kingdom and Empire endureth for ever. Amen. 


Take notice that if the linen garments were vestments of the Levites or of the Priests, and had 
been used for holy things, that they would be all the better. 


CHAPTER VII 


OF PLACES WHEREIN WE MAY CONVENIENTLY EXECUTE THE 
EXPERIMENTS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ART 


THE places best fitted for exercising and accomplishing Magical Arts and Operations are those 
which are concealed, removed, and separated from the habitations of men. Wherefore desolate 
and uninhabited regions are most appropriate, such as the borders of lakes, forests, dark and 
obscure places, old and deserted houses, whither rarely and scarce ever men do come, mountains, 
caves, caverns, grottos, gardens, orchards; but best. of all are cross-roads, and where four roads 
meet, during the depth and silence of night. But if thou canst not conveniently go unto any of 
these places, thy house, and even thine own chamber, or, indeed, any place, provided it hath been 
purified and consecrated with the necessary ceremonies, will be found fit and convenient for the 
convocation and assembling of the Spirits. 


These Arts or Operations should be carried out at the prescribed time, but if there be no time 
specially appointed it will be always better to perform them at night, which is the most fit and 
proper time for the Operations of Necromancy; this is also a symbol that it is just and right to 
hide them from the sight of the foolish, the ignorant, and the profane. 


But when thou shalt have selected a place fitting, thou mayest perform thine experiments by day 
or by night. It should be spacious, clear, and bounded on all sides by hedges, shrubs, trees, or 
walls. Thou shalt thyself cleanse it thoroughly and render it neat and pure, and while doing this 
thou shalt recite Psalms 11.; Ixvii.; and liv. 


After this thou shalt perfume it with the odours and suffumigations of the Art, and shalt sprinkle 
it with the water and the hyssop; and after this thou mayest in this place make all the necessary 
preparations for an operation. 


But when, later on, thou shalt go unto th4 place, to complete and accomplish the operation, thou 
shalt repeat on the way thither the following Prayer in a low and distinct voice:-- 


p. 95 


THE PRAYER. 


ZAZAI, ZAMAII, PUIDAMON Most Powerful, SEDON Most Strong, EL, YOD HE VAU HE, 
IAH, AGLA, assist me an unworthy sinner who have had the boldness to pronounce these Holy 
Names which no man should name and invoke save in very great danger. Therefore have I 
recourse unto these Most Holy Names, being in great peril both of soul and of body. Pardon me 
if I have sinned in any manner, for I trust in Thy protection alone, especially on this journey. 


Let the Master as he goeth sprinkle the path with the water and hyssop of the Art, while each of 
his Disciples shall repeat in a low voice the Prayer which we have enjoined for the days of 
fasting and preparation. 


Furthermore, let the Master appoint his Disciples to carry the things necessary for the Art. 
The first shall bear the Censer, the Fire, and the Incense. 

The Second; the Book, the Paper, the Pens, the Ink, and the various Perfumes. 

The Third; the Knife, and the Sickle. 

The Master; the Staff, and the Wand. 


But if there be more Disciples present, the Master shall distribute the things for each to carry, 
according to their number. 


When they shall have arrived at the place, and all things being disposed in their proper order, the 
Master shall take the Knife or other convenient consecrated Magical implement of Steel, 
wherewith to form the Circle of Art which he intends to construct. This being done, he must 
perfume it, and sprinkle it with water; and having warned and exhorted his Disciples, he shall 
work thus:-- 


First let him have a trumpet made of new wood, on the one side of which shall be written in 
Hebrew with the реп and ink of the Art these Names of God, ELOHIM GIBOR, ELOHIM 
TZABAOTH (see Figure 59); and on the other side these characters (see Figure 60). 


Having entered into the Circle to perform the Experiment, he should sound this Trumpet towards 
the four quarters of the Universe, first towards the East, then towards the South, then towards the 
West, and lastly towards the North. Then let him say:-- 


Hear ye, and be ye ready, in whatever part of the Universe ye may be, to obey the Voice of God 
the Mighty One, and the Names of the Creator. We let you know by this signal and sound that ye 
will be convoked hither, wherefore hold ye yourselves in readiness to obey our commands. 


This being done let the Master complete his work, renew the Circle, and make the incensements 
and fumigations. 


CHAPTER УШ 


OF THE KNIFE, SWORD, SICKLE, PONIARD, DAGGER, LANCE, WAND, 
STAFF, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS OF MAGICAL ART 


IN order to properly carry out the greatest and most important Operations of the Art, various 
Instruments are necessary, as a Knife with a white hilt, another with a black hilt, a short Lance, 
wherewith to trace Circles, Characters, and other things. 


The Knife with the white hilt (see Figure 61) should be made in the day and hour of Mercury, 
when Mars is in the Sign of the Ram or of the Scorpion. It should be dipped in the blood of a 
gosling and in the juice of the pimpernel, the Moon being at her full or increasing in light. Dip 
therein also the white hilt, upon the which thou shalt have engraved the Characters shown. 
Afterwards perfume it with the perfumes of the Art. 


With this Knife thou mayest perform all the necessary Operations of the Art, except the Circles. 
But if it seemeth unto thee too troublesome to make a similar Knife, have one made in the same 
fashion; and thou shalt place it thrice in the fire until it becometh red-hot, and each time thou 
shalt immerse it in the aforesaid blood and juice, fasten thereunto the white hilt having engraved 
thereon the aforesaid characters, and upon the hilt thou shalt write with the pen of Art, 
commencing from the point and going towards the hilt, these Names Agla, On, as shown in 
Figure 61. Afterwards thou shalt perfume and sprinkle it, and shalt wrap it in a piece of silken 
cloth. 


But as for the Knife with the black hilt (see Figure 62) for making the Circle, wherewith to strike 
terror and fear into the Spirits, it should be made in the same manner, except that it should be 
done in the day and hour of Saturn, and dipped in the blood of a black cat and in the juice of 
hemlock, the Characters and Names shown in Figure 62 being written thereon, from the point 
towards the hilt. Which being completed, thou shalt wrap it in a black silk cloth. 


The Scimitar (Figure 63), and the Sickle (Figure 64), are made in 


PLATE XII. 


ig. IS o> 

Fy 5 

д. Ne 
‘чх bw atx د‎ 
MINLA LA INDA нун Ы я 


Fiz. 59 


mass طط‎ 3a) ihn Rc 


TVA ЙТЫ MIMLA RVBGQ MIHLA 


ч; 62. The Knife with the 


TAs Kuifje with the 
Black Hilt, 


Waits Hele. 


рд o E fS toe ИЧ A 


Fig. 64. 


ages The Sickie. seit 
Case am aei 
Th Dagger ты Ansar 


Piare ХІУ. 
Арэ. Ag. уз. 
тюл! BRIS) e ددا‎ 


Fg. 73 


Унан рэр онт SAID 
ate "78. aT 76. 
ene Ф pera paa idee a phate paia 
Fg.20 7p. 82. 
Ap ? нон So 
а а 1 Ppa Ф буз 
5.05 Fig. 84: 


CV НУ 422 Ф Нс Fh ce „—‹ 
onu т HOE Gd, 
СЭ 


Fy. 85. 
ی‎ IR. He лө MEUA TN? 
imay obey 


Fig. 86. 

i ples 
fig. 87. 

t* TH sadn 
элн 


FS Vof е 
: 10") : TROR TK 
AID ү'н нн: пато» 

WIDNA wp 


р. 97 


the same way, as also the Dagger (Figure 65), the Poniard (Figure 66), and the short Lance 
(Figure 67), in the day and hour of Mercury, and they should be dipped in the blood of a magpie 
and the juice of the herb Mercury. Thou must make for them handles of white boxwood cut at a 
single stroke from the tree, at the rising of the Sun, with a new knife, or with any other 
convenient instrument. -The characters shown should be traced thereon. Thou shalt perfume 
them according to the rules of Art; and wrap them in silk cloth like the others. 


The Staff (Figure 68) should be of elderwood, or cane, or rosewood; and the Wand (Figure 69) 
of hazel or nut tree, in all cases the wood being virgin, that is of one year's growth only. They 
should each be cut from the tree at a single stroke, on the day of Mercury, at sunrise. The 
characters shown should be written or engraved thereon in the day and hour of Mercury. 


This being done, thou shalt say:-- 


ADONAI, Most Holy, deign to bless and to consecrate this Wand, and this Staff, that they may 
obtain the necessary virtue, through Thee, O Most Holy ADONAI, Whose kingdom endureth 
unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


After having perfumed and consecrated them, put them aside in a pure and clean place for use 
when required. 


Swords are also frequently necessary for use in Magical Arts. Thou shalt therefore take a new 
Sword which thou shalt clean and polish on the day of Mercury, and at the first or the fifteenth 
hour, and after this thou shalt write on one side these Divine Names in Hebrew, YODHE VAU 
НЕ, ADONAI, ЕНЕІЕН, ҮАҮАТ; and on the other side ELOHIM GIBOR (Figure 70); sprinkle 
and cense it and repeat over it the following conjuration:-- 


THE CONJURATION OF THE SWORD. 


I conjure thee, O Sword, by these Names, ABRAHACH, ABRACH, ABRACADABRA, 
YODHE VAU HE, that thou serve me for a strength and defence in all Magical Operations, 
against all mine Enemies, visible and invisible. 


I conjure thee anew by the Holy and Indivisible Name of EL strong and wonderful; by the Name 
SHADDAI Almighty; and by these Names QADOSCH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, ADONAI 
ELOHIM TZABAOTH, EMANUEL, the First and the Last, Wisdom, Way, Life, Truth, Chief, 
Speech, Word, Splendour, Light, Sun, Fountain, Glory, the Stone of the Wise, Virtue, Shepherd, 
Priest, Messiach Immortal; by these Names then, and by the other Names, I conjure thee, O 
Sword, that thou servest me for a Protection in all adversities. Amen. 


p. 98 


This being finished thou shalt wrap it also in silk like all the other Instruments, being duly 
purified and consecrated by the Ceremonies requisite for the perfection of all Magical Arts and 
Operations. 


Three 1 other Swords should be made for the use of the Disciples. 


The first one should have on the pommel the Name CARDIEL or GABRIEL (Figure 71); on the 
Lamen of the Guard, REGION (Figure 72); on the Blade, PANORAIM HEAMESIN (Figure 
73). 


The Second should have on the pommel the Name AURIEL (Figure 74); on the Lamen of the 
Guard, SARION (Figure 75); on the Blade, GAMORINDEBALIN (Figure 76). 


The third should have on the pommel the Name DAMIEL or RAPHAEL (Figure 77); on the 
Lamen of the Guard, YEMETON (Figure 78); on the Blade, LAMEDIN ERADIM (Figure 79). 


The Burin 2 (Figure 80) or Graver is useful for engraving or incising characters. In the day and 
hour either of Mars or of Venus thou shalt engrave thereon the characters shown, and having 
sprinkled and censed it thou shalt repeat over it the following Prayer:-- 


PRAYER. 


ASOPHIEL, ASOPHIEL, ASOPHIEL, PENTAGRAMMATON, ATHANATOS, EHEIEH 
ASHER EHEIEH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH; O God Eternal, and my Father, bless 
this Instrument prepared in Thine honour, so that it may only serve for a good use and end, for 
Thy Glory. Amen. 


Having again perfumed, thou shalt put it aside for use. The Needle may be consecrated in the 
same way. 


Footnotes 


98:1The description of these three Swords for the Disciples is only given in 1307 Sloane MSS. 


98:2From here to the end of the Chapter is from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER Ix 


OF ı THE FORMATION OF THE CIRCLE 


HAVING chosen a place for preparing and constructing the Circle, and all things necessary 
being prepared for the perfection of the Operations, take thou the Sickle or Scimitar of Art and 
stick it into the centre of the place where the Circle is to be made; then take a cord of nine feet in 
length, fasten one end thereof unto the Sickle and with the other end trace out the circumference 
of the Circle, which may be marked either with the Sword or with the Knife with the Black hilt. 
Then within the Circle mark out four regions, namely, towards the East, West, South, and North, 
wherein place Symbols; and beyond the limits of this Circle describe with the Consecrated Knife 
or Sword another Circle, but leaving an open space therein towards the North whereby thou 
mayest enter and depart beyond the Circle of Art. Beyond this again thou shalt describe another 
Circle at a foot distance with the aforesaid Instrument, yet ever leaving therein an open space for 
entrance and egress corresponding to the open space already left in the other. Beyond this again 
make another Circle at another foot distance, and beyond these two Circles, which are beyond 
the Circle of Art yet upon the same Centre, thou shalt describe Pentagrams with the Symbols and 
Names of the Creator therein so that they may surround the Circle already described. Without 
these Circles shalt thou circumscribe a Square, and beyond that another Square, so that the 
Angles of the former may touch the centres of the sides of the latter, and that the Angles of the 
latter may stretch towards the four quarters of the Universe, East, West, North, and South; and at 
the four Angles of each square, and touching them, thou shalt describe lesser Circles wherein let 
there be placed standing censers with lighted charcoal and sweet odours. 


These things being done, let the Magus of Art 2 assemble his Disciples, exhort, confirm, and 
cheer them; lead them into the Circle of Art and station them therein towards the Four Quarters 
of the Universe, exhort 


p. 100 


them to fear nothing, and to abide in their assigned places. Furthermore, let each of the 
Companions have a Sword besides the Sword of the Art, which he must hold naked in his hand. 
Then let the Magus quit the Circle, and Kindle the Censers, and place thereon exorcised Incense, 
as is said in the Chapter of Fumigations; and let him have the Censer in his hand and kindle it, 
and then place it in the part prepared. Let him now enter within the Circle and carefully close the 
openings left in the same, and let him again warn his Disciples, and take the Trumpet of Art 
prepared as is said in the Chapter concerning the same, and let him incense the Circle towards 
the Four Quarters of the Universe. 


After this let the Magus commence his Incantations, having placed the Sickle, Sword, or other 
Implement of Art upright in the ground at his feet. Having sounded the trumpet as before taught 
let him invoke the Spirits, and if need be conjure them, as is said in the First Book, and having 
attained his desired effect, let him license them to depart. 


Here followeth the Form of the Circle (see Figure 81), wherein whosoever entereth he shall be at 
safety as within a fortified Castle, and nothing shall be able to harm him. 


Footnotes 
99:1 This Chapter is only given in 10862 Add. MSS. 


99:2 'Maghus' in MS., not 'Magister.' 


CHAPTER X 


CONCERNING INCENSE, SUFFUMIGATIONS, PERFUMES, ODOURS, 
AND SIMILAR THINGS WHICH ARE USED IN MAGICAL ARTS 


THERE are many kinds of Incense, Suffumigations, and Perfumes, which are made for and 
offered unto the Spirits; those which are of sweet odour are for the good, those which are of evil 
savour are for the evil. 


For perfumes of good odour, take thou incense, aloes, nutmeg, gum benjamin, musk, and other 
fragrant spices, over the which thou shalt say:-- 


THE EXORCISM OF THE INCENSE. 


O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, deign to bless these odoriferous spices so that 
they may receive strength, virtue, and power to attract the Good Spirits, and to banish and cause 
to retire all hostile Phantoms. Through Thee, О Most Holy ADONAI, Who livest and reignest 
unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen. 


I exorcise thee, O Spirit impure and unclean, thou who art a hostile Phantom, in the Name of 
God, that thou quit this Perfume, thou and all thy deceits, that it may be consecrated and 
sanctified in the name of God Almighty. May the Holy Spirit of God grant protection and virtue 
unto those who use these Perfumes; and may the hostile and evil Spirit and Phantom never be 
able to enter therein, through the Ineffable Name of God Almighty. Amen. 


O Lord, deign to bless and to sanctify this Creature of Perfume so that it may be a remedy unto 
mankind for the health of body and of soul, through the Invocation of Thy Holy Name. May all 
Creatures who receive the odour of this incense and of these spices receive health of body and of 
soul, through Him Who hath formed the Ages. Amen. 


After this thou shalt sprinkle the various Spices with the Water of the Art, and thou shalt place 
them aside in a piece of silk as in other cases, or in a box destined for the purpose, so that thou 
mayest have them ready prepared for use when necessary. 


p. 102 


When thou wishest to use the incense, thou shalt kindle a fire of fresh charcoal, in earthen 
vessels newly glazed within and without, and thou shalt kindle fire fresh with flint and steel, and 
the fire being lighted thou shalt say over it as follows, before putting the Spices thereon 


THE EXORCISM OF THE FIRE. 
I exorcise thee, O Creature of Fire, by Him through Whom all things have been made, so that 


every kind of Phantasm may retire from thee, and be unable to harm or deceive in any way, 
through the Invocation of the Most High Creator of all. Amen. 


Bless, O Lord All Powerful, and All Merciful, this Creature of Fire, so that being blessed by 
Thee, it may be for the honour and glory of Thy Most Holy Name, so that it may work no 
hindrance or evil unto those who use it. Through Thee, O Eternal and Almighty Lord, and 
through Thy Most Holy Name. Amen. 


This being done, thou shalt put the Spices upon the Fire, and make what perfumes and 
suffumigations thou requirest. 


Over Fumigations of evil odour thou shalt say:-- 


ADONAI, LAZAI, DALMAI, AIMA, ELOHI, О Holy Father, grant unto us succour, favour, 

and grace, by the Invocation of thy Holy Name, so that these things may serve us for aid in all 
that we wish to perform therewith, that all deceit may quit them, and that they may be blessed 
and sanctified through Thy Name. Amen. 


CHAPTER XI 


OF THE WATER, AND OF THE HYSSOP 


IF it be necessary to sprinkle with water anything required in the Art it should be clone with a 
Sprinkler. 


Prepare a Censer in the day and hour of Mercury, with the odoriferous Spices of the Art. After 
this thou shalt take a vessel of brass, of lead varnished within and without, or of earth, which 
thou shalt fill with most clear spring water, and thou shalt have salt, and say these words over the 
salt:-- 


TZABAOTHI MESSIACH, EMANUEL, ELOHIM GIBOR, YOD HE VAU HE; O God, Who 
art the Truth and the Life, deign to bless and sanctify this Creature of Salt, to serve unto us for 
help, protection, and assistance in this Art, experiment, and operation, and may it be a succour 
unto us. 


After this cast the salt into the vessel wherein is the Water, and say the following Psalms: cii.; 
liv.; vi.; Ixvii. 


Thou shalt then make unto thyself a Sprinkler of vervain, fennel, lavender, sage, valerian, mint, 
garden-basil, rosemary, and hyssop, gathered in the day and hour of Mercury, the moon being in 
her increase. Bind together these herbs with a thread spun by a young maiden, and engrave upon 
the handle on the one side the characters shown in Figure 82, and on the other side those given in 


Figure 83. 


After this thou wayest use the Water, using the Sprinkler whenever it is necessary; and know that 
wheresoever thou shalt sprinkle this Water, it will chase away all Phantoms, and they shall be 
unable to hinder or annoy any. With this same Water thou shalt make all the preparations of the 
Art. 


CHAPTER XII 


OF THE LIGHT, AND OF THE FIRE 


IT hath been ever the custom among all nations to use fire and light in sacred things. For this 
reason the Master of the Art should also employ them in sacred rites, and besides those for 
reading the Conjurations by, and for the incense, in all operations Lights are necessary in the 
Circle. 


For this reason he should make candles of virgin wax in the day and hour of Mercury; the wicks 
should have been made by a young girl; and the Candles should be made when the moon is in 
her increase, of the weight of half a pound each, and on them thou shalt engrave these characters 
with the Dagger, or the Burin of Art. (See Figure 84.) 


After this thou shalt repeat over the Candles, Psalms cli.; ciii.; cvii., and shalt say:-- 


O Lord God, Who governest all things by Thine Almighty Power, give unto me, a poor sinner, 
understanding and knowledge to do only that which is agreeable unto Thee; grant unto me to 
fear, adore, love, praise, and give thanks unto Thee with true and sincere faith and perfect 
charity. Grant, O Lord, before I die, and descend into the realms beneath, and before the fiery 
flame shall devour me, that Thy Grace may not leave me, O Lord of my Soul. Amen. 


After this thou shalt add:-- 


I exorcise thee, O Creature of wax, by Him Who alone hath created all things by His Word, and 
by the virtue of Him Who is pure truth, that thou cast out from thee every Phantasm, Perversion, 
and Deceit of the Enemy, and may the Virtue and Power of God enter into thee, so that thou 
mayest give us light, and chase far from us all fear or terror. 


After this thou shalt sprinkle them with the Water of the Art, and incense them with the usual 
perfumes. 


And when thou shalt wish to kindle them thou shalt say:-- 


I exorcise thee, O Creature of Fire, in the Name of the Sovereign and Eternal Lord, by His 
Ineffable Name, which is YOD, HE, VAU, HE; by the Name IAH; and by the Name of Power 
EL; that thou mayest 


p. 105 


enlighten the heart of all the Spirits which we shall call unto this Circle, so that they may appear 
before us without fraud and deceit through Him Who hath created all things. 


Then thou shalt take a square Lantern, with panes of Crystal glass, and thou shalt fit therein the 
Candle lighted, to read by, to form the Circle, or any other purpose for which thou shalt require 
it. 


CHAPTER XIII 


CONCERNING ı THE PRECEPTS OF THE ART 


HE who hath attained the rank or degree of Exorcist, which we are usually accustomed to call 
Magus or Master according to grade, whensoever he desireth to undertake any operation, for the 
nine days immediately preceding the commencement of the work, should put aside from him all 
uncleanness, and prepare himself in secret during these days, and prepare all the things 
necessary, and in the space of these days all these should be made, consecrated, and exorcised. 


The which being duly completed, let him go on the day and hour of the commencement of the 
work, unto the place set apart for the same, as hath been said, in the place concerning the 
formation of the Circle. Let him instruct his Disciples on no cause whatsoever to move from 
their assigned places. And the Magus should exhort them with a bold and confident voice as 
follows:-- 


THE EXHORTATION OF THE COMPANIONS. 


Fear ye not, my beloved Companions, seeing that we draw near unto the desired end; therefore, 
all things being rightly done and the Conjurations and Exorcisms diligently performed, ye shall 
behold Kings of Kings, and Emperors of Emperors, and other Kings, Princes, and Majesties with 
them, and a great crowd of followers, together with all sorts of musical instruments, yet nothing 
should either the Magus or his Disciples fear. 


And then let the Magus say:-- 


I exhort you by these Holy Names of God, ELOHIM, ADONAI, AGLA, that none of you now 
presume to move or cross over from your appointed stations. 


This being said, let the Magus and his Disciples uncover the Holy Pentacles and show them 
towards each quarter, and they being shown in each place, there shall be noises and rushings. 


Then shall the Emperor of (the Spirits) say unto you:--From the 


p. 107 


time of the Great Addus until now, there hath not been an Exorciser who could behold my 
person, and unless those things 1 which ye have showed unto us had been made, ye would not 
now have seen me. But seeing that ye have powerfully called us, as I believe, by the rites derived 
from Solomon, and which but few of your comrades, or Exorcisers, possess, also they compel us 
against our will, and I therefore say unto thee that we wish to be obedient in all matters. 


Then shall the Magus place the petitions of himself and his companions, which should be written 
down clearly on virgin card, or paper, beyond the Circle towards the King or Prince of the 
Spirits, and he will receive it and take counsel with his Chiefs. After this he will return the Card, 


saying:--That which thou desirest is accomplished, be thy will performed, and all thy demands 
fulfilled. 


Footnotes 
106:1 This Chapter is only given in 10862 Add. MSS. 


107:1The Pentacles. 


CHAPTER XIV 


OF THE PEN, INK, AND COLOURS 
ALL things employed for writing, etc., in this Art, should be prepared in the following manner. 


Thou shalt take a male gosling, from which thou shalt pluck the third feather of the right wing, 
and in plucking it thou shalt say:-- 


ADRAI, HAHLII, ТАМАН, TILONAS, ATHAMAS, ZIANOR, ADONAI, banish from this pen 
all deceit and error, so that it may be of virtue and efficacy to write all that I desire. Amen. 


After this thou shalt sharpen it with the penknife of the Art, perfume it, sprinkle it, and place it 
aside in a silken cloth. 


Thou shalt have an Inkstand made of earth or any convenient matter, and in the day and hour of 
Mercury thou shalt engrave thereon with the Burin of Art these Names:--Yod, He, Vau, He, 
Metatron, Iah Iah Iah, Qadosch, Elohim Tzabaoth (see Figure 85); and in putting the ink therein 
thou shalt say:-- 


I exorcise thee, O Creature of Ink, by ANAIRETON, by SIMULATOR, and by the Name 
ADONAI, and by the Name of Him through Whom all things were made, that thou be unto me 
an aid and succour in all things which I wish to perform by thine aid. 


As it sometimes happeneth that it is necessary to write with some noble colour, it is well to have 
a new and clean box wherein to keep them. The principal colours will be Yellow or Gold, Red, 
Celestial or Azure Blue, Green, and Brown; and any other colours that may be requisite. Thou 
shalt exorcise, perfume, and sprinkle them in the usual manner. 


CHAPTER XV 


OF THE PEN OF THE SWALLOW AND OF THE CROW 
TAKE the feather of a Swallow or of a Crow, and before plucking it thou shalt say:-- 


May Holy MICHAEL the Archangel of God, and MIDAEL and MIRAEL, the Chiefs and 
Captains of the Celestial Army, be my aid in the operation I am about to perform, so that I may 
write herewith all things which are necessary, and that all the experiments which I commence 
herewith may through you and through your Names be perfected by the power of the Most High 
Creator. Amen. 


After this thou shalt point and complete the pen with the Knife of the Art, and with the pen and 
ink of the Art thou shalt write upon its side the Name, ANAIRETON (see Figure 86), and thou 
shalt say over it the following Psalms: cxxxiii.; cxvii. 


CHAPTER XVI 


OF THE BLOOD OF THE BAT, PIGEON, AND OTHER ANIMALS 
TAKE a living Bat and exorcise it thus:-- 
THE EXORCISM OF THE BAT. 


САМІАСН, EOMIAHE, EMIAL, MACBAL, ЕМОП, ZAZEAN, MAIPHIAT, 
ZACRATH,TENDAC, VULAMAHI; by these Most Holy Names, апа the other Names of 
Angels which are written in the Book ASSAMAIAN, 1 I conjure thee O Bat (or whatever animal 
it may be) that thou assist me in this operation, by God the True, God the Holy, the God Who 
hath created thee, and by Adam, Who hath imposed thy true name upon thee and upon all other 
animated beings. 


After this, take the Needle or other convenient Instrument of Art, as will be said later on, and 
pierce the bat in the vein which is in the right wing; and collect the blood in a small vessel over 
the which thou shalt say:-- 


Almighty ADONAI, ARATHRON, ASHAI, ELOHIM, ELOHI, ELION, ASHER EHEIEH, 
SHADDAI, O God the Lord, immaculate, immutable, EMANUEL, MESSIACH, YOD, HE, 
VAU, HE, be my aid, so that this blood may have power and efficacy in all wherein I shall wish, 
and in all that I shall demand. 


Perfume it and keep it for use. 


The blood of other winged animals may be taken in the same manner, with the proper 
solemnities. 


Note by Editor.-- cannot too strongly impress on the readers of this volume that the use of blood 
is more or less connected with Black Magic and that it should be avoided as much as possible. 


Footnotes 


110:1The 'Sepher Ha-Shamaiim,’ ог 'Book of the Heavens." 


CHAPTER XVII 


OF VIRGIN PARCHMENT, OR VIRGIN PAPER, AND HOW IT SHOULD BE 
PREPARED 


VIRGIN paper, or card, is that which is new, pure, clean, and exorcised, never having served for 
any other purpose. 


Virgin parchment is necessary in many Magical Operations, and should be properly prepared and 
consecrated. There are two kinds, one called Virgin, the other Unborn. Virgin parchment is that 
which is taken from an Animal which hath not attained the age of generation, whether it be ram, 
or kid, or other animal. 


Unborn parchment is taken from an animal which hath been taken before its time from the uterus 
of its mother. 


Take whichsoever of these two classes of animals thou pleasest, provided only that it be male, 
and in the day and hour of Mercury; and take it to a secret place where no man may see thee at 
work. Thou shalt have a marsh-reed cut at a single stroke with a new knife, and thou shalt strip 
from it the leaves, repeating this Conjuration:-- 


THE CONJURATION OF THE REED. 


I conjure thee by the Creator of all things, and by the King of Angels, Whose Name is EL 
SHADDAI, that thou receivest strength and virtue to flay this animal and to construct the 
parchment whereon I may write the Holy Names of God, and that it may acquire so great virtue 
that all which I shall write or do may obtain its effect, through Him who liveth unto the Eternal 
Ages. Amen. 


Before cutting the Reed recite Psalm Ixxii. 


After this, with the Knife of the Art, thou shalt fashion the Reed into the shape of a Knife, and 
upon it thou shalt write these Names: AGLA, ADONAI, ELOHI (see Figure 87), through Whom 
be the work of this Knife accomplished. Then thou shalt say:-- 


O God, Who drewest Moses, Thy well beloved and Thine elect, from among the Reeds on the 
marshy banks of the Nile, and from the Waters, 


p. 112 


he being yet but a child, grant unto me through Thy great mercy and compassion that this Reed 
may receive Power and Virtue to effect that which I desire through Thy Holy Name and the 
Names of Thy Holy Angels. Amen. 


This being done, thou shalt commence with this Knife to flay the Animal, whether it be Virgin or 
Unborn, saying:-- 


ZOHAR, ZIO, TALMAI, ADONAI, SHADDAI, TETRAGRAMMATON, and ye Holy Angels 
of God; be present, and grant power and virtue unto this parchment, and may it be consecrated 
by you, so that all things which I shall write thereon shall obtain their effect. Amen. 


The Animal being flayed, take Salt, and say thus over it:-- 


God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, Who hast created all things from Negative Existence, deign to 
bless and sanctify this Salt, so that in placing it upon this parchment which I wish to make, it 
may have such virtue that whatsoever I may write on it hereafter may attain its desired end. 
Amen. 


Afterwards rub the said parchment with the exorcised salt, and leave it in the Sun, to imbibe this 
salt for the space of an entire day. Then take a large earthen vessel glazed within and without, 
round the outside of which thou shalt write the characters in Figure 88. 


After this thou shalt put powdered lime into the vessel, saying 


OROII, ZARON, ZAINON, ZEVARON, ZAHIPHIL, ELION, be ye present and bless this work 
so that it may attain the desired effect, through the King of the Heavens, and the God of the 
Angels. Amen. 


Take then exorcised Water and pour it upon the said lime, and place the skin therein for three 
days, after which thou shalt take it thence, and scrape therefrom the lime and flesh adhering, with 
the Knife of Reed. 


After this thou shalt cut, with a single stroke, a Wand of Hazel, long enough for thee to form a 
Circle therewith; take also a cord spun by a young maiden, and small stones or pebbles from a 
brook, pronouncing these words:-- 


O God Adonai, Holy and Powerful Father, put virtue into these stones, that they may serve to 
stretch this parchment, and to chase therefrom all fraud, and may it obtain virtue by Thine 
Almighty Power. 


After this, having stretched the said parchment upon the Circle and bound it with the cord and 
stones, thou shalt say:-- 


AGLA, YOD, HE, VAU, HE, IAH, EMANUEL, bless and preserve this parchment, so that no 
Phantasm may enter therein. 


Let it dry thus for three days in a dark and shady place, then cut the cord with the Knife of Art, 
and detach the Parchment from the Circle, saying:-- 


ANTOR, ANCOR, TURLOS, BEODONOS, PHAIAR, APHARCAR, be present for a guard 
unto this Parchment. 


p. 113 


Then perfume it, and keep it in silk ready for use. 


No woman, if her flowers be upon her, should be permitted to see this parchment; otherwise it 
will lose its virtue. He who maketh it should be pure, clean, and prepared. 


But if the preparation of the aforesaid parchment seemeth too tedious, thou mayest make it in the 
following manner, but it is not so good. 


Take any Parchment, and exorcise it; prepare a censer with perfumes write upon the parchment 
the characters in Figure 89, hold it over the incense, and say:-- 


Be ye present to aid me, and may my operation be accomplished through you; ZAZAII, 
ZALMAII, DALMAII, ADONAI, ANAPHAXETON, CEDRION, CRIPON, PRION, 
ANAIRETON, ELION, OCTINOMON, ZEVANION, ALAZAION, ZIDEON, AGLA, ON, 
YODHE VAU HE, ARTOR, DINOTOR, Holy Angels of God; be present and infuse virtue into 
this Parchment, so that it may obtain such power through you that all Names and Characters 
thereon written may receive due power, and that all deceit and hindrance may depart therefrom, 
through God the Lord merciful and gracious, Who liveth and reigneth through all the Ages. 
Amen. 


Then shalt thou recite over the parchment Psalms Ixxii.; cxvii.; and cxxxiv.; and the 'Benedicite 
Omnia Opera.' Then say:-- 


I conjure thee, O parchment, by all the Holy Names, that thou obtainest efficacy and strength, 
and becomest exorcised and consecrated, so that none of the things which may be written upon 
thee shall be effaced from the Book of Truth. Amen. 


Then sprinkle it, and keep it as before said. 
The Cauls of newly-born children, duly consecrated, may also be used instead of virgin 


parchment. Also paper, satin, silk, and the like substances, may be employed in operations of less 
importance if duly exorcised and consecrated. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


OF WAX AND VIRGIN EARTH 


WAX and Virgin Earth are also employed in many Magical Operations, whether to make 
Images, or Candles, or other things; therefore they should never have been put to any other use. 
The Earth should be dug up with thine own hands, and reduced to a paste, without touching it 
with any instrument whatever, so that it be not defiled thereby. 


The Wax should be taken from bees which have only made it for the first time, and it should 
never have been employed for any other purpose; and when thou shalt wish it to avail thyself of 
the one or the other, thou shalt before commencing the work repeat the following conjuration:-- 


CONJURATION. 


EXTABOR, HETABOR, SITTACIBOR, ADONAI, ONZO, ZOMEN, MENOR, ASMODAL, 
ASCOBAT, COMATOS, ERIONAS, PROFAS, ALKOMAS, CONAMAS, PAPUENDOS, 
OSIANDOS, ESPIACENT, DAMNATH, EHERES, GOLADES, TELANTES, COPHI, 
ZADES, ye Angels of God be present, for I invoke ye in my work, so that through you it may 
find virtue and accomplishment. Amen. 


After this repeat Psalms схххі.ху.; сїї.; УШ. Ixxxiv.; Ixviil.; Іххи.; cxxxiii.; cxiii.; схху1.; xlvi. 
xlvii.; xxii.; li.; сххх.; схххіх. xlix. сх.; liii.; and say:-- 


I exorcise thee, O Creature of Wax (or of Earth), that through the Holy Name of God and His 
Holy Angels thou receive blessing, so that thou mayest be sanctified and blessed, and obtain the 
virtue which we desire, through the Most Holy Name of ADONAI. Amen. 


Sprinkle the wax and put it aside for use; but take note that the Earth which should be dug up 
with thy hands should be prepared every time thou hast need thereof. 


CHAPTER XIX 


CONCERNING THE NEEDLE AND OTHER IRON INSTRUMENTS 


THERE are several steel instruments necessary in various Operations, as a Needle to prick or to 
sew; a Burin, or instrument wherewith to engrave, etc. 


Thou shalt make such instruments in the day and hour of Jupiter, and when it is finished thou 
shalt say:-- 


I conjure thee, O Instrument of Steel, by God the Father Almighty, by the Virtue of the Heavens, 
of the Stars, and of the Angels who preside over them; by the virtue of stones, herbs, and 
animals; by the virtue of hail, snow, and wind; that thou receivest such virtue that thou mayest 
obtain without deceit the end which I desire in all things wherein I shall use thee; through God 
the Creator of the Ages, and Emperor of the Angels. Amen. 


Afterwards repeat Psalms iii.; 1x.; xxxi.; xlii.; Ix.; li.; CXXX. 


Perfume it with the perfumes of the Art, and sprinkle it with exorcised water, wrap it in silk and 
ѕау:-- 


DANI, ZUMECH, AGALMATUROD, GADIEL, РАМІ, CANELOAS, MEROD, GAMIDOI, 
BALDOI, METRATOR, Angels most holy, be present for a guard unto this instrument. 


CHAPTER XX 


CONCERNING THE SILKEN CLOTH 


WHEN any Instrument of the Art is properly consecrated, it should be wrapped in silk and put 
away, as we have said. 


Take, then, silk of any colour except black or grey, whereon write the words and Characters in 
Figure 90. 


Perfume it with incense of good odour, sprinkle it, and recite Psalms Ixxxii.; Іххи.; cxxxiv.; Ixiv. 


After this thou shalt put it aside for seven days with sweet spices and thou shalt use this silk to 
wrap all the Instruments of the Art. 


CHAPTER XXI 


CONCERNING CHARACTERS, AND THE CONSECRATION OF THE 
MAGICAL BOOK 


WHENSOEVER in any Operation it is necessary to write Characters, and thou fearest that thou 
wilt fail, do this: Write at the beginning the Name EHEIEH ASHER EHEIEH (Figure 91), and at 
the end the Name AIN SOPH (Figure 92); between these Names write what thou wishest, and if 
thou hast anything especial to do bear the said written Names upon the wrapper in silk, and thou 
shalt say over them:-- 


Most Wise and Most High Creator of all things, I pray Thee for Thy grace and mercy that Thou 
mayest grant such virtue and power unto these Holy Names, that Thou mayest keep these 
characters from all deceit and error, through Thee, O Most Holy ADONAI. Amen. 


After having repeated this thou shalt write the requisite Characters, and thou shalt not fail, but 
shalt attain thy desired end. 


THE CONSECRATION OF THE BOOK. 1 


Make a small Book containing the Prayers for all the Operations, the Names of the Angels in the 
form of Litanies, their Seals and Characters; the which being done thou shalt consecrate the same 
unto God and unto the pure Spirits in the manner following:-- 


Thou shalt set in the destined place a small table covered with a white cloth, whereon thou shalt 
lay the Book opened at the Great Pentacle which should be drawn on the first leaf of the said 
Book; and having kindled a lamp which should be suspended above the centre of the table, thou 
shalt surround the said table with a white curtain; clothe thyself in the proper vestments, and 
holding the Book open, repeat upon thy knees the following prayer with great humility:-- 


(For the Prayer beginning 'Adonai Elohim,' etc., see Book I., Chapter XTV., where it is given іп 
full.) 


After which thou shalt incense it with the incense proper to the 


p. 118 


[paragraph continues] Planet and the day, and thou shalt replace the Book on the aforesaid Table, taking 
heed that the fire of the lamp be kept up continually during the operation, and keeping the 
curtains closed. Repeat the same ceremony for seven days, beginning with Saturday, and 
perfuming the Book each day with the Incense proper to the Planet ruling the day and hour, and 
taking heed that the lamp shall burn both day and night; after the which thou shalt shut up the 
Book in a small drawer under the table, made expressly for it, until thou shalt have occasion to 
use it; and every time that thou wishest to use it, clothe thyself with thy vestments, kindle the 
lamp, and repeat upon thy knees the aforesaid prayer, 'Adonai Elohim,’ etc. 


It is necessary also, in the Consecration of the Book, to summon all the Angels whose Names are 
written therein in the form of Litanies, the which thou shalt do with devotion; and even if the 
Angels and Spirits appear not in the Consecration of the Book, be not thou astonished thereat, 
seeing that they are of a pure nature, and consequently have much difficulty in familiarising 
themselves with men who are inconstant and impure, but the Ceremonies and Characters being 
correctly carried out devoutedly and with perseverance, they will be constrained to come, and it 
will at length happen that at thy first invocation thou wilt be able to see and communicate with 
them. But I advise thee to undertake nothing unclean or impure, for then thy importunity, far 
from attracting them, will only serve to chase them from thee; and it will be thereafter 
exceedingly difficult for thee to attract them for use for pure ends. 


Footnotes 


117:1The rest of this Chapter is from 1203 Lansdowne MSS. 


CHAPTER XXII 


CONCERNING SACRIFICES TO THE SPIRITS, AND HOW THEY SHOULD 
BE MADE 


IN many operations it is necessary to make some sort of sacrifice unto the Demons, and in 
various ways. Sometimes white animals are sacrificed to the good Spirits and black to the evil. 
Such sacrifices consist of the blood and sometimes of the flesh. 


They who sacrifice animals, of whatsoever kind they be, should select those which are virgin, as 
being more agreeable unto the Spirits, and rendering them more obedient. 


When blood is to be sacrificed it should be drawn also from virgin quadrupeds or birds, but 
before offering the oblation, say:-- 


May this Sacrifice which we find it proper to offer unto ye, noble and lofty Beings, be agreeable 
and pleasing unto your desires; be ye ready to obey us, and ye shall receive greater ones. 


Then perfume and sprinkle it according to the rules of Art. 


When it is necessary, with all the proper Ceremonies, to make Sacrifices of fire, they should be 
made of wood which hath some quality referring especially unto the Spirits invoked; as juniper, 
or pine, unto the Spirits of Saturn; box, or oak, unto those of Jupiter; cornel, or cedar, unto those 
of Mars; laurel unto those of the Sun; myrtle unto those of Venus; hazel unto those of Mercury; 
and willow unto those of the Moon. 


But when we make sacrifices of food and drink, everything necessary should be prepared 
without the Circle, and the meats should be covered with some fine clean cloth, and have also a 
clean white cloth spread beneath them; with new bread and good and sparkling wine, but in all 
things those which refer to the nature of the Planet. Animals, such as fowls or pigeons, should be 
roasted. Especially shouldest thou have a vessel of clear and pure fountain water, and before thou 
enterest into the Circle, thou shalt summon the Spirits by their proper Names, or at least those 
chief among them, saying:-- 


In whatsoever place ye may be, ye Spirits, who are invited to this 
p. 120 


feast, come ye and be ready to receive our offerings, presents, and sacrifices, and ye shall have 
hereafter yet more agreeable oblations. 


Perfume the viands with sweet incense, and sprinkle them with exorcised water; then commence 
to conjure the Spirits until they shall come. 


This is the manner of making sacrifices in all arts and operations wherein it is necessary, and 
acting thus, the Spirits will be prompt to serve thee. 


Here endeth our Key, the which if thou thoroughly instillest into thy memory, thou shalt be able, 
if it pleaseth thee, even to fly with the wings of the wind. But if thou takest little heed hereof, and 
despiseth this Book, never shalt thou attain unto the desired end in any Magical experiment or 
operation whatsoever. 


For in this Book is comprised all science of Magical Art, and it should be strictly kept by thee. 
And hereunto is the end of our Key, in the Name of God the righteous, the merciful, and the 
eternal, Who liveth and reigneth throughout the Ages. Amen. 


THE END OF THE KEY OF SOLOMON THE KING 


ANCIENT FRAGMENT OF THE KEY OF 
SOLOMON, 


TRANSLATED FROM THE HEBREW By ELIPHAZ LEVI, and given in his 'Philosophie 
Occulte,' Serie II., page 136. 


I will now give unto thee the Key of the Kingdom of the Spirits. 

This Key is the same as that of the Mysterious Numbers of Yetzirah. 1 

The Spirits are governed by the natural and universal Hierarchy of things. 

Three command Three through the medium of Three. 

There are the Spirits of Above, those of Below, and those of the Centre; then if thou invertest the 
Sacred Ladder, if thou descendest instead of ascending, thou wilt discover the Counter-Hierarchy 


of the Shells, or of the Dead Spirits. 


Know thou only that the Principalities of Heaven, the Virtues, and the Powers, are not Persons, 
but dignities. 


They are the Degrees of the Sacred Ladder upon which the Spirits ascend and descend. 
Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and the others, are not Names but Titles. 

The First of the Numbers is the Unity. 

The First of the Divine Conceptions called the Sephiroth is Kether or the Crown. 


The First Category of the Spirits is that of Chaioth Ha-Qadesh or the Intelligences of the Divine 
Tetragram, whose Letters are symbolised by the Mysterious Animals in the Prophecy of Ezekiel. 


Their empire is that of unity and synthesis. They correspond to the Intelligence. 


They have for adversaries the Thamiel or Double-Headed Ones, the Demons of revolt and of 
anarchy, whose two Chiefs, ever at War with each other, are Satan and Moloch. 


The second Number is two; the second Sephira is Chokmah or Wisdom. 
p. 122 


The Spirits of Wisdom are the Auphanim, a Name which signifieth the Wheels, because all acts 
in Heaven like immense Wheels spangled with Stars. Their Empire is that of Harmony. They 
correspond to the Reason. 


They have for adversaries the Chaigidel, or the Shells which attach themselves to Material and 
Lying Appearances. Their Chief, or rather their Guide, for Evil Spirits obey no one, is Beelzebub, 
whose Name signifieth the God of Flies, because Flies haunt putrefying corpses. 


The third Number is three. The third Sephira is Binah or Understanding. 


The Spirits of Binah are Aralim, or the Strong. Their empire is the creation of ideas; they 
correspond to activity and energy of thought. 


They have for adversaries the Satariel, or concealers, the Demons of absurdity, of intellectual 
inertia, and of Mystery. The Chief of the Satariel is Lucifuge, called falsely and by anti-phrase 
Lucifer (as the Eumenides, who arc the Furies, are called in Greek the Gracious Ones). 


The fourth Number is four. The fourth Sephira is Gedulah or Chesed, Magnificence or Mercy. 


The Spirits of Gedulah are the Chaschmalim, or the Lucid Ones. Their empire is that of 
beneficence; they correspond to the imagination. 


They have for adversaries the Gamchicoth or the Disturbers of Souls. The Chief or Guide of 
these Demons is Ashtaroth or Astarte, the impure Venus of the Syrians, whom they represent 
with the head of an ass or of a bull, and the breasts of a woman. 


The fifth Number is five. The fifth Sephira is Geburah or justice. 


The Spirits of Geburah are the Seraphim, or the Spirits burning with zeal. Their empire is that of 
the chastisement of crimes. They correspond to the faculty of comparing and of choosing. 


They have for adversaries the Golab or incendiaries, Genii of wrath and sedition, whose Chief is 
Asmodeus, whom they call also Samael the Black. 


The sixth Number is six. The sixth Sephira is Tiphereth the Supreme Beauty. 


The Spirits of Tiphereth are the Malachim, or the Kings. Their empire is that of the Universal 
Harmony. They correspond to the judgment. 


They have for adversaries the Tagaririm, or Disputers, whose Chief is Belphegor. 
The seventh Number is seven. The seventh Sephira is Netzach, or Victory. 


The Spirits of Netzach are the Elohim or the Gods, that is to say the 


p. 123 


representatives of God. Their empire is that of progress and of life; they correspond to the 
Sensorium or to sensibility. 


They have for adversaries the Harab-Serapel, or the Ravens of Death, whose Chief is Baal. 


The eighth Number is eight. The eighth Sephira is Hod or eternal order. 


The Spirits of Hod are the Beni-Elohim or Sons of the Gods. Their empire is that of order; they 
correspond to the inner sense. 


They have for adversaries the Samael or jugglers, whose Chief is Adramelech. 

The ninth Number is nine. The ninth Sephira is Yesod, or the fundamental principle. 

The Spirits of Yesod are the Cherubim or Angels, those powers which fecundate the earth, and 
which are represented in Hebrew symbolism under the form of bulls. Their empire is that of 


fecundity. They correspond to true ideas. 


They have for adversaries the Gamaliel or obscene, whose Queen is Lilith, the Demon of 
debaucheries. 


The tenth Number is ten. The tenth Sephira is Malkuth, or the kingdom of Forms. 


The Spirits of Malkuth are the Ischim, or the virile ones; they are the souls of the Saints whose 
Chief is Moses. (Let us not forget that it is Solomon who speaks.--Eliphaz Lévi.) 


They have for adversaries the wicked ones who obey Nahema, the Demon of Impurity. 
The wicked are symbolised by the five accursed nations whom Joshua was to destroy. 
Joshua, or Jehoshua the Saviour, is a symbol of the Messiach. 


His Name is composed of the Letters of the Divine Tetragram changed into the Pentagram by the 
addition of the Letter Schin (see Figure 94). 


Each letter of this Pentagram represents a power of good attacked by the five accursed nations. 
For the real history of the people of God is the allegorical legend of Humanity. 
The five accursed nations are:-- 

1. The Amalekites or Aggressors; 

2. The Geburim or Violent Ones; 

3. The Raphaim or Cowards; 


4. The Nephilim or Voluptuous Ones; 
5. The Anakim or Anarchists. 


p. 124 
The Anarchists are vanquished by the Yod, which is the Sceptre of the Father. 


The Violent are vanquished by the Hé, which is the Gentleness of the Mother. 


The Cowards are vanquished by the Vau, which is the Sword of Michael, and Generation by 
travail and pain. 


The Voluptuous are vanquished by the second Hé, which is the painful bringing forth of the 
Mother. 


Lastly, the Aggressors are vanquished by the Schin, which is the Fire of the Lord and the 
equilibrating Law of justice. 


The Princes of the Perverse Spirits are the False Gods whom they adore. 


Hell has then no other government than that fatal law which punishes perversity and corrects 
error, for the false Gods only exist in the false opinion of their adorers. 


Baal, Belphegor, Moloch, Adramelech, have been the idols of the Syrians; idols without soul, 
idols now destroyed, and of whom the Name alone remaineth. 


The True God hath vanquished all the Demons as Truth triumphs over Error. That is past in the 
opinions of men, and the Wars of Michael against Satan are the symbols of movement, and of 
the progress of Spirits. 

The Devil is ever a God of refusal. 

Accredited idolatries are religions in their time. 

Superannuated idolatries are Superstitions and Sacrileges. 

The Pantheon of Phantoms, which are then in vogue, is the Heaven of the Ignorant. 

The Receptacle of Phantoms, whom Folly even wisheth for no longer, is the Hell. 

But all this existeth only in the Imagination of the Vulgar. 


For the Wise, Heaven is the Supreme Reason, and Hell is Folly. 


But it must be understood that we here employ the word Heaven in the Mystical sense which we 
give it in opposing to it the word Hell. 


In order to evoke Phantoms it is sufficient to intoxicate oneself or to render oneself mad; for 
Phantoms are ever the companions of drunkenness and of vertigo. 


The Phosphorus of the imagination, abandoned to all the caprices of over-excited and diseased 
nerves, fills itself with Monsters and absurd visions. 


We can also arrive at hallucination by mingling together wakefulness and sleep by the graduated 
use of narcotics; but such actions are crimes against nature. 


Wisdom chaseth away Phantoms, and enables us to communicate with the Superior Spirits by the 
contemplation of the Laws of Nature and the study of the Holy Numbers. 


p. 125 
(Here King Solomon addresseth himself to his son, Roboam):-- 


Do thou, O my son Roboam, remember, that the Fear of Adonai is only the beginning of 
Wisdom. 


Keep and preserve those who have not Understanding in the Fear of Adonai, which will give and 
will preserve unto thee my crown. 


But learn to triumph thyself over Fear by Wisdom, and the Spirits will descend from Heaven to 
serve thee. 


I, Solomon, thy father, King of Israel and of Palmyra, I have sought out and obtained in my lot 
the Holy Chokmah, which is the Wisdom of Adonai. 


And I have become King of the Spirits as well of Heaven as of Earth, Master of the Dwellers of 
the Air, and of the Living Souls of the Sea, because I was in possession of the Key of the Hidden 
Gates of Light. 


I have done great things by the virtue of the Schema Hamphorasch, and by the Thirty-two Paths 
of Yetzirah. 


Number, weight, and measure determine the form of things; the substance is one, and God 
createth it eternally. 


Happy is he who comprehendeth the Letters and the Numbers. 


The Letters are from the Numbers, and the Numbers from the Ideas, and the Ideas from the 
Forces, and the Forces from the Elohim. The Synthesis of the Elohim is the Schema. 


The Schema is one, its columns are two, its power is three, its form is four, its reflection giveth 
eight, which multiplied by three giveth unto thee the twenty-four Thrones of Wisdom. 


Upon each Throne reposeth a Crown with three Rays, each Ray beareth a Name, each Name is 
an Absolute Idea. There are Seventytwo Names upon the Twenty-four Crowns of the Schema. 


Thou shalt write these Names upon Thirty-six Talismans, two upon each Talisman, one on each 
side. 


Thou shalt divide these Talismans into four series of nine each, according to the number of the 
Letters of the Schema. 


Upon the first Series thou shalt engrave the Letter Yod, symbolised by the Flowering Rod of 
Aaron. 


Upon the second the Letter Hé, symbolised by the Cup of Joseph. 
Upon the third the Letter Vau, symbolised by the Sword of David my father. 
And upon the fourth the Hé final, symbolised by the Shekel of Gold. 


These Thirty-six Talismans will be a Book which will contain all the Secrets of Nature. And by 
their diverse combinations thou shalt make the Genii and Angels speak. 


(HERE ENDETH THE FRAGMENT OF THE KEY OF SOLOMON.) 


Footnotes 


121:1 The 'Sepher Yetzirah,' or 'Book of Formation,' one of the most ancient Books of the 
Qabalah. 


THE QABALISTICAL INVOCATION OF 
SOLOMON 


Given by Eliphaz Lévi in 'Rituel de la Haute Magie,' Chapter xiii. 

POWERS of the Kingdom, be beneath my left foot, and within my right hand. 
Glory and Eternity touch my shoulders, and guide me in the Paths of Victory. 
Mercy and justice be ye the Equilibrium and splendour of my life. 
Understanding and Wisdom give unto me the Crown. 


Spirits of Malkuth conduct me between the two columns whereon is supported the whole edifice 
of the Temple. 


Angels of Netzach and of Hod strengthen me upon the Cubical Stone of Yesod. 

O GEDULAHEL! O GEBURAHEL! O TIPHERETH! 

BINAHEL, be Thou my Love! 

RUACH CHOKMAHEL, be Thou my Light! 

Be that which Thou art, and that which thou willest to be, O KETHERIEL! 

Ishim, assist me іп the Name Of SHADDAL 

Cherubim, be my strength in the Name of ADONAL 

Beni Elohim, be ye my brethren in the Name of the Son, and by the virtues of TZABAOTH. 
Elohim, fight for me in the Name of TETRAGRAMMATON. 

Malachim, protect me in the Name Of YOD HE VAU HE. 

Seraphim, purify my love in the Name of ELOAH. 

Chaschmalim, enlighten me with the splendours of ELOHI, and of SCHECHINAH. 
Aralim, act ye; Auphanim, revolve and shine. 


Chaioth Ha-Qadosch, cry aloud, speak, roar, and groan; Qadosch, Qadosch, Qadosch., 
SHADDAI, ADONAI, YOD CHAVAH, ЕНЕЕН ASHER EHEIEH! 


Halelu-Yah! Halelu-Yah! Halelu-Yah. Amen. 


THE END. 


Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His Majesty at the Edingburgh University Press 


LATE 
The Mystical Alphabets. 


