AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 22. 

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 vd22sbe 
 Next 
 Avestan 
 Glossary 

 Vendidad 

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 7, 2001.

Translated by James Darmesteter (From Sacred Books of the East ,
American Edition, 1898.)

It has already been seen that of all healers, the most powerful
is the one who treats with the Holy Word (Manthra Spenta), that
is with sacred spells ( Vd7.44 ):
Of all sacred spells, the most efficacious is the
 Airyema ishyo , which forms the fifty-fourth
Ha of the Yasna . This is expressed under a mythological form
in the following Fargard (cf. Westergaard's Fragments , IV).

Angra Mainyu having created 99,999 diseases, Ahura applies for
remedy to the Holy Word (Manthra Spenta; §§ 1-5). -- How
shall I manage? asks Manthra Spenta (§ 16). Ahura sends his messenger
to Airyaman with the same request.

This Fargard is unfinished or, more correctly, the end of it is
understood. Airyaman comes at once to Ahura's call, and digs nine
furrows. It is no doubt in order to perform the Barashnom ,
by the virtue of which the strength of the demon and of the demon's
work will be broken. The Fargard ends therefore with spells against
sickness and agailist death, added to the usual spells of the
ordinary Barashnom.

 FARGARD 22. Angra Mainyu creates 99,999 diseases; Ahura Mazda counters with the
Holy Manthra and with Airyaman 

 I. 

 Notes: 

1. Ahura Mazda spake unto Spitama Zarathushtra, saying: 'I,
Ahura Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made this
mansion 1 , the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go
up, there may I arrive!)

 1. 'The Garothman' (Comm.), Paradise.

2. 'Then the ruffian looked at me 2 ; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, thou most glorious Manthra
Spenta!

 2. And cast on me the evil eye; 'it was by casting the evil eye
 on the good creatures of Ohrmazd that Ahriman corrupted them' (Eznig,
 Refutatio Haeresiarum II). See Vd20.3 .

3. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka 3 ,
made by Mazda and holy.

'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.

 3. The Genius of the good eye; see Vd19.37, and note .

4. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.
 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females big with
young, of all species of small cattle; I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

5. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
makes the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.

6. 'Manthra Spenta, the all-glorious, replied unto me: "How
shall I heal thee? How shall I drive away from thee those nine
diseases, and those ninety, those nine hundred, those nine
thousand, and those nine times ten thousand diseases?"'

 II. 

7. The Maker Ahura Mazda called for
Nairyo-sangha 4 : Go thou, Nairyo-sangha, the herald, and drive
towards the mansion of Airyaman, and speak thus unto him:

 4. The messenger of Ahura Mazda. He is a form of Atar, the
 Fire ( Yasna 17.11 ).

8. Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy One, unto thee:
 'I, Ahura Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made
this mansion, the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I
ascend, there may I arrive!)

9. 'Then the ruffian looked at me; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O Airyaman, the vow-fulfiller!

10. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy,
 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy,

11. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.
 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females big with
young, of all species of small cattle. I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

12. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
make, the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.'

 III. 

13. In obedience to Ahura's words he went, Nairyo-sangha, the
herald; he drove towards the mansion of Airyaman, he spake unto
Airyaman, saying:

14. Thus speaks Ahura Mazda, the Holy One, unto thee: 'I, Ahura
Mazda, the Maker of all good things, when I made this mansion,
the beautiful, the shining, seen afar (there may I go up, there
may I arrive!)

15. 'Then the ruffian looked at me; the ruffian Angra Mainyu,
the deadly, wrought against me nine diseases, and ninety, and
nine hundred, and nine thousand, and nine times ten thousand
diseases. So mayst thou heal me, O Airyaman, the vow-fulfiller!

16. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
swift-running steeds ; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.
 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand fleet,
high-humped camels; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka,
made by Mazda and holy.

17. 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand brown oxen that
do not push; I offer thee up a sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by
Mazda and holy.
 'Unto thee will I give in return a thousand females, big
with young, of all species of small cattle; I offer thee up a
sacrifice, O good Saoka, made by Mazda and holy.

18. 'And I will bless thee with the fair blessing-spell of the
righteous, the friendly blessing-spell of the righteous, that
makes the empty swell to fulness and the full to overflowing,
that comes to help him who was sickening, and makes the sick man
sound again.'

 IV. 

19. Quickly was it done, nor was it long, eagerly set off the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman, towards the mountain of the holy
Questions 5 , towards the forest of the holy Questions.

 5. The mountain where 'the holy conversations' between Ohrmazd
 and Zarathushtra took place (cf. Vd19.11 ).

20. Nine kinds of stallions brought he with him, the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman 6 .

Nine kinds of camels brought he with him, the vow-fulfilling
Airyaman.

Nine kinds of bulls brought he with him, the vow-fulfilling
Airyaman.

Nine kinds of small cattle brought he with him, the
vow-fulfilling Airyaman.

He brought with him the nine twigs 7 ; he drew along nine
furrows 8 .

 6. According to Framji, 'He brought with him the strength
 of nine stallions,' to infuse it into the sick man
 (cf. Yasht 8.24 ).

 7. That is to say, 'the nine-knotted stick' (Framji; cf.
 Vd9.14 ).

 8. To perform the Barashnom, 'the great service of the Nirang Din,
 through which all evil, moral and natural, including evil passions,
 disease, and death will be removed' (Wilson, The Parsi Religion ,
 p. 341).

[21 9 . 'I drive away Ishire and I drive away Aghuire; I drive away
Aghra and I drive away Ughra; I drive away sickness and I drive
away death; I drive away pain and I drive away fever; I drive
away Sarana and I drive away Sarastya; I drive away Azhana and I
drive away Azhahva; I drive away Kurugha and I drive away
Azhivaka; I drive away Duruka and I drive away Astairya. I drive
away the evil eye, rottenness, and infection which Angra Mainyu
has created against the bodies of mortals.

 9. From the Vendidad Sada ; as Vd20.9-13 .

22. 'I drive away all manner of sickness and death, all the
Yatus and Pairikas, and all the wicked Jainis.

23. ' A Airyema Ishyo :-
May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman come here, for the men and
women of Zarathushtra to rejoice, for Vohu-mano to rejoice; with
the desirable reward that Religion deserves. I solicit for
holiness that boon that is vouchsafed by Ahura.

24. 'May the vow-fulfilling Airyaman smite all manner of
sickness and death, all the Yatus and Pairikas, and all the
wicked Jainis.

25. ' Yatha ahu vairyo :-
The will of the Lord is the law of
righteousness. The gifts of Vohu-mano to the deeds done in this
world for Mazda. He who relieves the poor makes Ahura king.

' Kem-na mazda :-
What protector hast thou given unto me O
Mazda! while the hate of the wicked encompasses me? Whom but
thy Atar and Vohu-mano, through whose work I keep on the world of
righteousness? Reveal therefore to me thy Religion as thy rule!
 'Ke verethrem-ja:- Who is the victorious who will protect
thy teaching? Make it clear that I am the guide for both worlds. 
May Sraosha come with Vohu-mano and help whomsoever thou
pleasest, O Mazda!
 'Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Armaiti Spenta! Perish,
O fiendish Druj! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world
of the fiend! Perish away, O Druj! Perish away to the regions of
the north, never more to give unto death the living world of
Righteousness!']

 [end of the Vendidad ] 

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 vd22sbe 
 Next 
 Avestan 
 Glossary
