AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 15. 

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 vd15sbe 
 Next 
 Avestan 
 Glossary 

 AVESTA: VENDIDAD (English): Fargard 15. Regarding certain sins and obligations. 

This digital edition prepared by Joseph H. Peterson, 1995; updated Jul 4, 2001.

Translated by James Darmesteter (From Sacred Books of the East ,
American Edition, 1898.)

I (1-8). On five sins the commission of which makes the sinner
a Peshotanu.

II a (9-12). On unlawful unions and attempts to procure miscarriage.

II b (13-19). On the obligations of the illegitimate father towards
the mother and the child.

III (20-45). On the treatment of a bitch big with young.

IV (46-51). On the breeding of dogs.

 FARGARD 15. Regarding certain sins and obligations 

 I. 

 Notes: 

1. How many are the sins that men commit and that, being committed
and not confessed, nor atoned for, make their committer a Peshotanu 1 ?

 1. That is to say: he shall receive two hundred strokes with the
 Aspahe-ashtra or the Sraosho-charana; or pay three hundred istirs.

2. Ahura Mazda answered: 'There are five such sins, O holy Zarathushtra!
It is the first of these sins that men commit when a man teaches
one of the faithful another faith, another law 2 , a lower doctrine,
and he leads him astray with a full knowledge and conscience of
the sin: the man who has done the deed becomes a Peshotanu.

 2. The Commentary has, 'that is, a creed that is not ours.'

3. 'It is the second of these sins when a man gives bones too
hard or food too hot to a shepherd's dog or to a house-dog;

4. 'If the bones stick in the dog's teeth or stop in his throat;
or if the food too hot burn his mouth or his tongue, he may come
to grief thereby; if he come to grief thereby, the man who has
done the deed becomes a Peshotanu 3 .

 3. He who gives too hot food to a dog so as to burn his throat is
 margarzan (guilty of death); he who gives bones to a dog so as
 to tear his throat is margarzan ( Gr. Riv. 639).

5. 'It is the third of these sins when a man smites a bitch big
with young or affrights her by running after her, or shouting
or clapping with the hands;

6. 'If the bitch fall into a hole, or a well, or a precipice,
or a river, or a canal, she may come to grief thereby; if she
come to grief thereby, the man who has done the deed becomes a
Peshotanu 4 .

 4. If a bitch is big with young [pregnant -JHP] and a man shouts or throws stones
 at her, so that the whelps come to mischief and die, he is margarzan
 ( Gr. Riv. 639).

7. 'It is the fourth of these sins when a man has intercourse
with a woman who has the whites or sees the blood, the man that
has done the deed becomes a Peshotanu 5 .

 5. [i.e. during menstruation. -JHP]
 See Vd16.14 seq. 

8. 'It is the fifth of these sins when a man has intercourse
with a woman quick with child 6 , whether the milk has already come
to her breasts or has not yet come: she may come to grief thereby;
if she come to grief thereby 7 , the man who has done the deed becomes
a Peshotanu.

 6. When she has been pregnant for four months and ten days, as
 it is then that the child is formed and a soul is added to its
 body (Anquetil II, 563).

 7. Or better; 'if the child die.' 'If a man come to his wife [during
 her pregnancy] so that she is injured and bring forth a still-born
 child, he is margarzan' ( Old Riv. 115 b).

 IIa. 

9. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered 8 , and she conceives by him, let her
not, being ashamed of the people, produce in herself the menses,
against the course of nature, by means of water and plants 9 .

 8. 'Whether she has a husband in the house of her own parents
 or has none; whether she has entered from the house of her own
 parents into the house of a husband [depending on another chief
 of family] or as not' (Comm.)

 9. By means of drugs. [i.e. abortion -JHP]

10. 'And if the damsel, being ashamed of the people, shall produce
in herself the menses gainst the course of nature, by means of
water and plants, it is a fresh sin as heavy [as the first] 10 .

 10. 'It is a tanapuhr sin for her: it is sin on sin' (the first
 sin being to have allowed herself to be seduced), Comm. 'If there
 has been no sin in her (if she has been forced), and if a man,
 knowing her shame, wants to take it off her, he shall call together
 her father, mother, sisters, brothers, husband, the servants,
 the menials, and the master and the mistress of the house, and
 he shall say, "This woman is with child by me, and I rejoice
 in it;" and they shall answer, "We know it, and we
 are glad that her shame is taken off her;" and he shall support
 her as a husband does' (Comm.)

11. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, let her not,
being ashamed of the people, destroy the fruit in her womb.

12. 'And if the damsel, being ashamed of the people, shall destroy
the fruit in her womb, the sin is on both the father and herself,
the murder is on both the father and herself; both the father
and herself shall pay the penalty for wilful murder 11 .

 11. For baodhô-varshta; see Vd7.38 .

 IIb. 

13. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, and she says,
"I have conceived by thee;" and he replies, "Go
then to the old woman 12 and apply to her for one of her drugs,
that she may procure thee miscarriage;"

 12. The nurse (Framji) or the midwife.

14. 'And the damsel goes to the old woman and applies to her for
one of her drugs, that she may procure her miscarriage; and the
old woman brings her some Banga, or Shaeta, a drug that kills
in the womb or one that expels out of the womb 13 , or some other
of the drugs that produce miscarriage and [the man says], "Cause
thy fruit to perish!" and she causes her fruit to perish;
the sin is on the head of all three, the man, the damsel, and
the old woman.

 13. Banga is bang or mang, a narcotic made from hempseed,
 ahaêta is another sort of narcotic.

15. 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered [unto a
husband] or not delivered, and she conceives by him, so long shall
he support her, until the child be born.

16. 'If he shall not support her, so that the child comes to grief 14 ,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

 14. And dies.

17. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If she be near
her time, which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support
her?

18. Ahura Mazda answered: 'If a man come near unto a damsel, either
dependent on the chief of the family or not dependent, either
delivered [unto a husband] or not delivered, and she conceives
by him, so long shall he support her, until the child be born 15 .

 15. §18 = § 15.

19. 'If he shall not support her 16 .... 
'It lies with the faithful to look in the same way after every
pregnant female, either two-footed or four-footed, two-footed
woman or four-footed bitch.'

 16. The sentence is left unfinished: Framji fills it with the words
 in § 16, 'so that the child,' &c. It seems as if §§
 17, 18 were not part of the original text, and as if § 17
 were a mere repetition of § 20, which being wrongly interpreted
 as referring to a woman would have brought about the repetition
 of § 15 as an answer. See § 20.

 III. 

20. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If (a bitch 17 )
be near her time, which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall
support her?

 17. The subject is wanting in the text: it is supplied from the
 Commentary and from the sense. [i.e. in heat -JHP]

21. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He whose house stands nearest, the
care of supporting her is his 18 ; so long shall he support her,
until the whelps be born.

 18. The bitch is lying on the high road: the man whose house has
 its door nearest shall take care of her. If she dies, he shall
 carry her off [to dispose of the body according to the law]. One
 must support her for at least three nights: if one cannot support
 her any longer, one entrusts her to a richer man' (Comm. and Framji).

22. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support; he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

23. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for camels, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

24. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for camels
or whoso holds it 19 , the care of supporting her is his; so long
shall he support her, until the whelps be born.

 19. 'In pledge or for rent' (Framji).

25. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

26. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for horses, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

27. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for horses
or whoso holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long
shall he support her, until the whelps be born.

28. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

29. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a stable for oxen, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

30. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the stable for oxen or
whoso holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall
he support her, until the whelps be born.

31. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

32. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a sheep-fold, which is the worshipper
of Mazda that shall support her?

33. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who built the sheepfold or whoso
holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he
support her, until the whelps be born.

34. 'If he shall not support her so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

35. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying on the earth-wall 20 ,
which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

 20. The wall around the house.

36. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who erected the wall or whoso holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support
her, until the whelps be born.

37. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

38. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the moat 21 , which is the worshipper
of Mazda that shall support her?

 21. The moat before the earth-wall.

39. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who dug the moat or whoso holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support
her, until the whelps be born.

40. 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to grief,
for want of proper support, he shall pay for it the penalty for
wilful murder.'

41. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the middle of a pasture-field, which
is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

42. Ahura Mazda answered: 'He who sowed the pasture-field or whoso
holds it, the care of supporting her is his; [so long shall he
support her, until the whelps be bo If he shall not support her,
so that the whelps come to grief, for want of proper support,
he shall pay for it the penalty for wilful murder.]

43. 'He shall take her to rest upon a litter of nemovanta or of
any foliage fit for a litter; so long shall he support her, until
the young dogs are capable of self-defence and self-subsistence.'

44. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are the
dogs capable of self-defence and self-subsistence?

45. Ahura Mazda answered: 'When they
are able to run about in a circuit of twice seven
houses around 22 . Then they may be let loose,
whether it be winter or summer.

'Young dogs ought to be supported for six
months 23 , children for seven years 24 .

'Atar 25 , the son of Ahura Mazda, watches as well
(over a pregnant bitch) as he does over a woman.'

 22. Probably the distance of one yujyeshti; see Vd8.17 .

 23. Catulos sex mensibus primis dum corrohorentur emitti non
 oportet... (Columella, De re agraria , VII, 12).

 24. The age when they are invested with the kusti and sudre, and
 become members of the Zoroastrian community.

 25. 'When a woman becomes pregnant in a house, it is necessary to
 make an endeavor so that there may be a continual fire in that
 house, and to maintain a good watch over it. And, when the child
 becomes separate from the mother, it is necessary to burn a lamp
 for three nights and days -- if they burn a fire it would be better -- so
 that the demons and fiends may not be able to do any damage and
 harm; because, when a child is born, it is exceedingly delicate
 for those three days'
 ( Saddar 16 ; West,
 Pahlavi Texts , III, 277).

 IV. 

46. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda want to have a bitch so covered that the offspring shall
be one of a strong nature, what shall they do?

47. Ahura Mazda answered: 'They shall dig a hole in the earth,
in the middle of the fold half a foot deep if the earth be hard,
half the height of a man if the earth be soft.

48. 'They shall first tie up [the bitch] there, far from children
and from the Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda 26 , and they shall watch
by her until a dog comes there from anywhere; then another again,
and then a third again 27 , each being kept apart from the former,
lest they should assail one another.

 26. 'From children, lest she shall bite them; from the fire, lest
 it shall hurt her' (Comm.)

 27. Cf. Justinus III, 4: maturiorem futuram conceptionem rati, si
 eam singulae per plures viros experirentur.

49. 28 'The bitch being thus covered by three dogs, grows big with
young, and the milk comes to her teats and she brings forth a
young one that is born from several dogs.'

 28. The text of this and the following clause is corrupt, and the
 meaning is doubtful.

50. If a man smite a bitch who has been covered by three dogs,
and who has already milk, and who shall bring forth a young one
born from several dogs, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

51. Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seven hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra,
seven hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.'

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 vd15sbe 
 Next 
 Avestan 
 Glossary
