AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (English): Ashi Yasht ("Hymn to Ashi") 

 Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 

 Contents 

 Prev 

 Yt17 

 Next 

 Avestan 

 Glossary 

 Avesta: Khorda Avesta 

 17. ASHI YASHT ("Hymn to Ashi") 

 This digital edition copyright © 1995
by Joseph H. Peterson. All rights reserved. 

English translation by James Darmesteter (From Sacred Books of the
East , American Edition, 1898.)

Avestan text based on edition of Karl F. Geldner, Avesta, the Sacred
Books of the Parsis, Stuttgart, 1896.

This hymn is also known as the "Ard Yasht."

"Ashi Vanghuhi or 'the good Ashi 1 ' is a feminine impersonation 
of piety 2 , and she is, at the same time, the source of all the good 
and riches that are connected with piety 3 . She is described, therefore, 
as a goddess of Fortune and Wealth, and is invoked in company 
with Parendi, the goddess of Treasures ( Sirozah 25 ).

She appears in the latter character in the first part of the Yasht 
( §§ 1-14 ); she praises and loves Zarathushtra 
( §§ 15-21 ). She is worshipped by Haoshyangha 
( § 26 ), Yima (§ 28), Thraetaona [Faridoon] (§ 33), 
Haoma (§ 37), Husravah (§ 41), Zarathushtra (§ 45), and Vishtaspa 
(§ 49) 4 . She rejects the offerings of all sterile people (old men, 
courtezans, and children, §§ 53-61).

 Notes: 
 1. In Parsi Ardishvang or Ard ( Ardish from Artish , the Persian 
 form of Ashish ); she presides over the 25th day of the month; cf. 
 Sirozah 25. 
 2. Ashi is not the feminine adjective of Asha, as the i was 
 originally short (genitive ashôish , not ashyau ); ashi is ar-ti, and 
 means bhakti , piety (Neriosengh). 
 3. The so-called Ashi's remedies ( ashôish baêshaza ; cf. 
 Yt13.32 .) 
 4. This enumeration is the same as in the Gosh Yasht 
 (§§ 3, 8, 14, 17, 21, 26, 29).

 I. 

0. (pa nãm i ýazdã, hôrmezd i hvadâe
i awazûnî gurz hvarahe awazâyât, 
mainyô arshasañg bê rasât, 
 ezh hamâ gunâh ... pa patit hôm!) 

xshnaothra ahurahe mazdå, tarôidîti angrahe
mainyêush, haithyâvarshtãm hyat vasnâ
ferashôtemem. staomî ashem, 
ashem vohû...(3). 
fravarâne mazdayasnô zarathushtrish vîdaêvô
ahura-tkaêshô, 

 (Here recite the appropriate Gah dedication.) 

ashôish vanghuyå cistôish vanghuyå erethê
vanghuyå rasãstâtô vanghuyå hvarenanghô
savanghô mazdadhâtahe 
xshnaothra ýasnâica vahmâica xshnaothrâica
frasastayaêca, 
ýathâ ahû vairyô zaotâ frâ-mê
mrûtê, 
athâ ratush ashâtcît haca frâ ashava vîdhvå
mraotû!

1. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm,

1. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, 
high, tall-formed, well worthy of sacrifice, with a 
loud-sounding chariot, strong, welfare-giving, healing, 
with fulness of intellect 5 , and powerful;

 5. Perethu-vîra ; see Études Iraniennes, II, 183.

2. dukhdharem ahurahe mazdå hvangharem ameshanãm
speñtanãm ýâ vîspanãm
saoshyañtãm frasha xrathwa frathañjayeiti
uta-hê âsnem xratûm ava-baraiti vârema
uta-hê âsnaêca zbayañtâi dûraêca
zbayañtâi jasaiti avanghe, ýô ashîm
ýazâite zaothrâbyô hô mithrem ýazâite
zaothrâbyô.

2. The daughter of Ahura Mazda, the sister of 
the Amesha-Spentas, who endows all the Saoshyants 6 

with the enlivening intelligence; she also 
brings heavenly wisdom at her wish, and comes to 
help him who invokes her from near and him who 
invokes her from afar, and worships her with offerings 
of libations.

 6. The allies of Saoshyant, who are to be active in the restoration 
 of the world to eternal life (frashegird). Cf. Yt11.17, note 1 . 
 Ashi gives them the 'intelligence of life' ( frasha khratu ), through 
 which they will be enabled to perform their task.

3. ahe raya hvarenanghaca 
tãm ýazâi surunvata ýasna 
tãm ýazâi huyashta ýasna 
ashîm vanguhîm zaothrâbyô, ashîm
vanguhîm ýazamaide 
haomayô gava baresmana hizvô danghangha mãthraca
vacaca shyaothnaca zaothrâbyasca arshuxdhaêibyasca
vâkhzhibyô. 
ýenghê hâtãm âat ýesnê
paitî vanghô mazdå ahurô vaêthâ
ashât hacâ ýånghãmcâ tãscâ
tåscâ ýazamaide!

3 7 . For her brightness and glory, I will offer her 
a sacrifice worth being heard; I will offer up unto 
Ashi Vanguhi a good sacrifice with an offering of 
libations. We sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi with 
the libations, with the Haoma and meat, with the 
baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the 
holy spells, with the words, with the deeds, with 
the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words. 
Yenhe-hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....

 7. Cf. Yt5.10. 

 II. 

4. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

4. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect, and powerful.

5. haomaheca nemô mãthraheca ashaonaêca zarathushtrahe,

atcit bâ nemô haomâi 
ýat vîspe anye madhånghô 
aêshma haciñte xrvidrvô 
âat hô ýô haomahe madhô 
asha hacaite hvaê-paithe.

5. Homage unto Haoma, and unto the Mathra 8 , 
and unto the holy Zarathushtra! 
Homage unto Haoma, because all other drinks 
are attended with Aeshma 9 , the fiend of the wounding 
spear: but the drinking of Haoma is attended 
with Asha and with Ashi Vanguhi herself 10 .

 8. The Holy Word. 
 9. The Daeva of anger. 
 10. As drinking of Haoma is an act of religion (cf. 
 Yasna 11, 12 seq. )

6. ashish vanguhi ashi srîre ashi bânumaiti shâiti
vyâvaiti bânubyô 
ashi dâthre vohûm hvarenô 
aêshãm narãm ýôi hacahi, 
hubaoidhish baodhaite nmânem 
ýenghe nmâne ashish vanguhi 
sûra pâdha nidathaite 
âgremaitish darekhâi haxedhrâi.

6. Ashi is fair; Ashi is radiant with joy; she is 
far-piercing with her rays. Ashi gives good Glory 

unto those men whom thou dost follow, O Ashi! 
Full of perfumes is the house in which the good, 
powerful Ashi Vanguhi puts her .... 11 feet, for long
friendship.

 11. ? Âgairimaitish.

7. tê narô xshathra xshayeñte ash-baourva

nidhâtô-pitu hubaoidhi 
ýahmya staretasca gâtush 
anyåsca berexdhå avaretå 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, 
ushta bâ ýim hacahi 
uta mãm upanghacahi 
vouru-saredha amavaiti.

7. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi! 
are kings of kingdoms, that are rich in horses, with 
large tributes, with snorting horses, sounding chariots, 
flashing swords, rich in aliments and in stores of 
food 12 ; well-scented where the beds are spread and 
full of all the other riches that may be wished for. 
Happy the man whom thou dost attend! do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong!

 12. Cf. Yt5.130 .

8. aêshãm nmânå hvidhâtå

gaosûrånghô hishteñte 
ash-paourvå darekhô-upastêe 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, 
ushta bâ ýim hacahi 
uta mãm upanghacahi 
vouru-saredha amavaiti.

8. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have houses that stand well laid up, rich in 
cattle, foremost in Asha, and long-supported. Happy 
the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou attend 
me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and 
strong!

9. aêshãm gâtava hishteñte 
hustareta hupô-busta 
hukereta barezish-havañtô 
zaranyapaxshta-pâdhånghô 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

9. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have beds that stand well-spread, well-adorned, 
well-made, provided with cushions and with feet 
inlaid with gold. Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong!

10. aêshãm vañtånghô bât
mainyånghô 
gâtush paiti ångheñti 
ýôi srîra barezish-havañtô 
merezyumnå añku-paêsemnå 
frâ gaoshâvara sispimna 
cathru-karana minuca zaranyô-pisi. kadha nô avi âjasât
nmânô-paitish kadha shâiti paitishâm fryâ
paiti tanvi 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

10. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have their ladies that sit on their beds, 
waiting for them: they lie on the cushions, adorning 
themselves, .... 13 , with square bored ear-rings and 
a necklace of gold: 'When will our lord come? 
when shall we enjoy in our bodies the joys of love?' 

Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong!

 13. ? Ankupasmanau.

11. aêshãm kaininô ångheñte 
ãkhmô-paidhish urvizô-maidhyå 
sraotanvô darekhô-añgushtå 
kehrpa avavatãm sraya 
ýatha didhayatãm zaoshô 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

11. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have daughters that sit .... 14 ; thin is 
their waist, beautiful is their body, long are their 
fingers; they are as fair of shape as those who look 
on can wish. Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong!

 14. ? Âgamô-paidhisha.

12. aêshãm aspånghô bayeñte 
âsavô ravô-fraothemanô 
raom vâshem vâshayañte 
mrâtem carema thañjayeñte 
taxmem staotârem vazeñti 
âsu-aspem derezi-rathem 
tizhi-arshtîm darekha-âreshtaêm 
xshviwi-ishûm parô-kevîdhem 
vîtârem paskât hamerethem 
jañtârem parô dushmainyûm 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

12. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have horses swift and loud-neighing; 
they drive the chariot lightly, they take it to the 
battle 15 , they bear a gallant praiser (of the gods), 
who has many horses, a solid chariot, a sharp spear, 
a long spear, and swift arrows, who hits his aim, 
pursuing after his enemies, and smiting his foes. 
Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou 
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things 
and strong!

 15. Doubtful.

13. aêshãm ushtrånghô bayeñte

saêni-kaofa ash-manangha aojayeni zemat peretamna vadhairyavô

ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, ushta bâ ýim
hacahi uta mãm upanghacahi vouru-saredha amavaiti.

13. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have large-humped, burden-bearing camels, 
flying from the ground or fighting with holy fieriness 16 . 
Happy the man whom thou dost attend! 
Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable 
things and strong!

 16. Cf. Yt14.11. 

14. aêshãm erezatem zaranim 
niberethi âbereta baraiti 
aiwitarâbyô haca danghubyô 
vastråsca keshå bâmanivå 
ýôi hacahi ashish vanguhi, 
ushta bâ ýim hacahi 
uta mãm upanghacahi 
vouru-saredha amavaiti.

14. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! 
have hoards of silver and gold brought 
together from far distant regions; and garments of 
splendid make. Happy the man whom thou dost 
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts 
of desirable things and strong!

15. apa mãm apa-daidhya 
frâ-mãm aiwi-urvaêsayanguha 
marzhdikem ashish berezaiti, 
hudhâta ahi hucithra 
vasatha ahi xshayamna 
tanuye hvarenanghe dâite.

15. Do not turn thy look from me! turn thy 
mercy towards me, O great Ashi! thou art well-made 
and of a noble seed 17 ; thou art sovereign at 
thy wish; thou art Glory in a bodily form.

 17. Born from the gods; cf. Hadhokht Nask, Part II, § 9. 

16. pita-tê ýô ahurô mazdå 
ýô mazishtô ýazatanãm 
ýô vahishtô ýazatanãm, 
mâta ârmaitish speñta 
brâta tê ýô vanghush sraoshô ashyô

rashnushca berezô amavå 
mithrasca vouru-gaoyaoitish ýô baêvare-spasanô
hazangra-gaoshô hvangha daêna mâzdayesnish.

16. Thy father is Ahura Mazda, the greatest of 
all gods, the best of all gods; thy mother is Armaiti Spenta; 
thy brothers are Sraosha 18 , a god of Asha, 
and Rashnu 19 , tall and strong, and Mithra 20 , the lord
of wide pastures, who has ten thousand spies and 
a thousand ears; thy sister is the Law [Daena] 21 of the worshippers 
of Mazda.

 18. See Yt11. 
 19. See Yt12. 
 20. See Yt10. 
 21. [See Yt16. ] 

17. upa-staota ýazatanãm 
amuyamna razishtanãm 
paiti-stayata raithya 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
uiti vacêbish aojana, 
kô ahi ýô mãm zbayehi 
ýenghe azem frâyô zbayeñtãm 
sraêshtem susruye vâcim.

17. Praised of the gods, unoffended by the righteous 22 , 
the great Ashi Vanguhi stood up on her 
chariot, thus speaking: 'Who art thou who dost 
invoke me, whose voice is to my ear the sweetest 
of all that invoked me most?'

 22. Or, 'doing no harm to the righteous.'

18. adhât uiti fravashata, 
ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô 
ýô paoiryô mashyâkô 
staota ashem ýat vahishtem 
ýazata ahurem mazdãm 
ýazata ameshê speñtê 
ýenghe zãthaêca vaxshaêca 
urvâsen âpô urvaråsca 
ýenghe zãthaêca vaxshaêca 
uxshin âpô urvaråsca,

18. And he said aloud: 'I am Spitama Zarathushtra, 
who, first of mortals, recited the praise of 
the excellent Asha 23 and offered up sacrifice unto 
Ahura Mazda and the Amesha-Spentas; in whose 
birth and growth the waters and the plants rejoiced; 
in whose birth and growth the waters and the plants 
grew; in whose birth and growth all the creatures 
of the good creation cried out, Hail 24 !

 23. The Ahunwar. 
 24. Cf. Yt13.93. 

19. ýehe zãthaêca vaxshaêca 
apa-dvarat angrô mainyush 
haca zemat ýat pathanayå 
skarenayå dûraêpârayå, 
uiti davata hô ýô duzhdå 
angrô mainyush pouru-mahrkô, 
nôit mãm vîspe ýazatånghô

anuseñtem fraoreciñta 
âat mãm aêvô zarathushtrô 
anuseñtem apayeiti,

19. 'In whose birth and growth Angra Mainyu 
rushed away from this wide, round earth, whose 
ends lie afar, and he, the evil-doing Angra Mainyu, 
who is all death, said: "All the gods together 

have not been able to smite me down in spite 
of myself, and Zarathushtra alone can reach me in 
spite of myself.

20. jaiñti mãm ahuna vairya avavata snaithisha ýatha
asma katô-maså, tâpayeiti mãm asha vahishta
mãnayen ahe ýatha ayaoxshustem, raêkô
mê haca anghå zemat vanghô kerenaoiti 
ýô mãm aêvô jâmayeiti 
ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô.

20. '"He smites me with the Ahuna Vairya, as 
strong a weapon as a stone big as a house 25 ; he 
burns me with Asha-Vahishta, as if it were melting 
brass 26 . He makes it better for me that I should 
leave this earth, he, Spitama Zarathushtra, the only 
one who can daunt me."'

 25. Cf. Vd19.4. 
 26. Cf. Yt3. 

21. adhât uiti fravashata 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, 
nazdyô mãm upa-hishta 
erezvô ashâum spitama 
upa mê srayanguha vâshahe, 
nazdyô tãm upa-hishtat 
ýô spitâmô zarathushtrô 
upa hê srayata vâshahe.

21. And the great Ashi Vanguhi exclaimed: 'Come nearer unto me,
thou pure, holy Spitama! lean against my chariot!' 
Spitama Zarathushtra came nearer unto her, he leant against her
chariot.

22. â-dim usca pairi-marezat 
hâvôya bâzvô dashinaca 
dashina bâzvô hâvayaca 
uiti vacêbish aojana, 
srîrô ahi zarathushtra 
hukeretô ahi spitama 
hvascvô darekhô-bâzâush 
dâtem tê tanuye hvarenô 
urunaêca darekhem havanghem 
ýatha imat ýat tê frâvaocim. 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

22. And she caressed him with the left arm and the right, with
the right arm and the left, thus speaking: 'Thou art beautiful,
O Zarathushtra! thou art well-shapen, O Spitama! strong are thy
legs and long are thy arms: Glory is given to thy body and long
cheerfulness 27 to thy soul, as sure as I proclaim it unto thee.'

 27. Bliss after death.

 III. 

23. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

23 28 . We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect and powerful.

 28. As § 1. 

24. tãm ýazata 
haoshyanghô paradhâtô 
upa upabdi harayå berezô 
srîrayå mazdadhâtayå.

24 29 . To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhata, offer up a sacrifice,
upon the enclosure of the Hara, the beautiful height, made by
Mazda.

 29. For §§ 24-26, cf. Yt9.3-6 . 

25. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýat bavâni aiwi-vanyå 
vîspe daêva mâzanya, 
ýatha azem nôit tarshtô frânmâne

thwaêshât parô daêvaêibyô

frâ ahmât parô vîspe daêva 
anusô tarshta nemåñte 
tarshta temanghô dvaråñti.

25. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant 
me this, O great Ashi Vanguhi! that I may overcome all the Daevas of Mazana; that I
may never fear and bow through terror before the Daevas, but that
all the Daevas may fear and bow in spite of themselves before
me, that they may fear and flee down to darkness.'

26. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, vîñdât
tem ýânem haoshyanghô paradhâtô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

26. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Haoshyangha,
the Paradhata, obtained that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

 IV. 

27. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

27. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

28. tãm ýazata 
ýô ýimô xshaêtô hvãthwô

hukairyât haca barezanghat.

28 30 . To her did Yima Khshaeta, the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice
from the height Hukairya.

 30. For §§ 28-31, cf. Yt9.8-11 . 

29. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýatha azem fshaoni vãthwa ava-barâni avi mazdå
dâmabyô ýatha azem amerextîm avi-barâni
avi mazdå dâmabyô,

29. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring fatness and flocks down to the world
created by Mazda; that I may bring immortality down to the world
created by Mazda;

30. uta azem apa-barâni va shudhemca tarshnemca haca mazdå
dâmabyô uta azem apa-barâni va zaourvãmca
merethyûmca haca mazdå dâmabyô uta azem
apa-barâni va garememca vâtem aotemca haca mazdå
dâmabyô hazangrem aiwi-gâmanãm.

30. 'That I may take away both hunger and thirst, from the world
created by Mazda; that I may take away both old age and death,
from the world created by Mazda; that I may take away both hot
wind and cold wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a thousand
years.'

31. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem ýô ýimô xshaêtô
hvãthwô. 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

31. Then great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Yima Khshaeta,
the good shepherd, obtained that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice ....

 V. 

32. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

32. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

33. tãm ýazata 
vîsô puthrô âthwyânôish 
vîsô sûrayå thraêtaonô 
upa varenem cathru-gaoshem.

33 31 . To her did Thraetaona, the heir of the valiant Athwya clan,
offer up a sacrifice in the four-cornered Varena.

 31. Cf. Yt5.34 ; Yt9.14 ;
 Yt15.24 .

34. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýat bavâni aiwi-vanyå azhîm dahâkem
thrizafanem thrikameredhem xshvash-ashîm hazangrâ-ýaoxshtîm
ashaojanghem daêvîm drujem akhem gaêthâvyô
drvañtem ýãm ashaojastemãm drujem
fraca kereñtat angrô mainyush aoi ýãm
astvaitîm gaêthãm mahrkâi ashahe gaêthanãm,
uta-hê vañta azâni sanghavâci arenavâci
ýôi hen kehrpa sraêshta zazâtêe
gaêthyâi tê ýôi abdôteme.

34. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may overcome Azhi Dahaka, the three-mouthed, the
three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most
powerful, fiendish Druj, that demon, baleful to the world, the
strongest Druj that Angra Mainyu created against the material
world, to destroy the world of the good principle; and that I
may deliver his two wives, Savanghavak and Erenavak, who are the
fairest of body amongst women, and the most wonderful creatures
in the world.'

35. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem vîsô puthrô athwyânôish
vîsô sûrayå thraêtaonô. 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

 35.
The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Thraetaona,
the heir of the valiant Athwya clan, obtained that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice ....

 VI. 

36. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

36. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

37. tãm ýazata 
haomô frâshmish baêshazyô 
srîrô xshathryô zairi-dôithrô 
barezishte paiti barezahi 
haraithyô paiti barezayå.

37 32 . To her did Haoma offer up a sacrifice, Haoma, the enlivening,
the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes, upon
the highest height of the Haraiti Bareza.

 32. For §§ 37-39, cf. Yt9.17-19 .

38. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýatha azem bañdayeni mairîm tûirîm
frangrasyânem uta bastem vâdhayeni uta bastem upanayeni
bastem kavôish haosravanghahe janât tem kava haosrava
pasne varôish caêcastahe jafrahe uruyâpahe puthrô
kaêna syâvarshânâi zûrô-jatahe
narahe akhraêrathaheca naravahe.

38. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bind the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan,
that I may drag him bound, that I may bring him bound unto king
Husravah, that king Husravah may kill him, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of his
father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha, a semi-man.'

39. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem haomô frâshmish baêshazyô
srîrô xshathryô zairi-dôithrô. 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

39. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Haoma, the
enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden
eyes, obtained that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice....

 VII. 

40. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

40. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

41. tãm ýazata 
arsha airyanãm dah'yunãm 
xshathrâi hañkeremô haosrava.

41 33 . To her did the gallant Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations
into one kingdom, offer up a sacrifice, behind the Chaechasta
lake, the deep lake of salt waters.

 33. For §§ 41-43, cf. Yt9.21-23 .

42. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýatha azem nijanâni mairîm tûirîm
frangrasyânem pasne varôish caêcastahe jafrahe
urvyâpahe puthrô kaêna syâvarshânâi
zûrô-jatahe narahe akhraêrathaheca naravahe.

 42.
He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may kill the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan,
behind the Chaechasta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge
the murder of my father Syavarshana, a man, and of Aghraeratha,
a semi-man.'

43. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem arsha airyanãm dah'yunãm
xshathrâi hañkeremô haosrava. 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

43. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. The gallant
Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations into one kingdom, obtained
that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

 VIII. 

44. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

44. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

45. tãm ýazata ýô ashava zarathushtrô
airyene vaêjahi vanghuyå dâityayå.

45 34 . To her did the holy Zarathushtra offer up a sacrifice in the
Airyana Vaejah, by the good river Daitya, with the Haoma and meat,
with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy
spells, with the speech, with the deeds, with the libations, and
with the rightly-spoken words.

 34. For §§ 45-47, cf. Yt9.25-27 .

46. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýatha azem hâcayene vanguhîm âzâtãm
hutaosãm anumatêe daênayâi anûxtêe
daênayâi anu-varshtêe daênayâi ýâ-mê
daênãm mâzdayasnîm zrasca dât apica
aotât ýâ-mê varezânâi vanguhîm
dât frasastîm.

46. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring the good and noble Hutaosa to think
according to the law, to speak according to the law, to do according
to the law, that she may spread my law and make it known, that
she may bestow beautiful praises upon my deeds.'

47. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem ýô ashava zarathushtrô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

47. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the holy
Zarathushtra obtained that boon. 
For her brightness, and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

 IX. 

48. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

 48.
We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

49. tãm ýazata 
berezaidhish kava vîshtâspô 
pasne âpô dâityayå.

 49.
To her did the tall Kavi Vishtaspa offer up a sacrifice behind
the waters of the river Daitya.

50. âat hîm jaidhyat, 
avat âyaptem dazdi-mê 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
ýatha azâni peshana ashta aurvañtô vîspa-thaurvô
ashtôish puthrô vîspa-thaurvô urvi-xaodhô
urvi-verethrô stvî-manaothrish ýenghe hapta
sata ushtranãm jainyâvarat pasca hvîdhahe,
ýatha azâni peshana mairyehe h'yaonahe arejat-aspahe,
ýatha azâni peshana darshinikahe daêvayasnahe.

 50.
He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may put to flight Ashta-aurvant, the son of Vispo-thaurvo-asti,
the all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the brazen armour,
of the thick neck, behind whom seven hundred 

camels ....; that I may put to flight the 
Hvyaona murderer, Arejat-aspa; that I may put to 
flight Darshinika, the worshipper of the Daevas;

51. uta azem nijanâni tãthryâvañtem
duzhdaênem uta azem nijanâi spinjaurushem daêvayasnem,
uta azem fraourvaêsayeni humaya varedhakanãmca h'yaonya
haca dainghâvô, uta azem nijanâni h'yaonînãm
dah'yunãm pañcasakhnâi satakhnâishca
satakhnâi hazangrakhnâishca hazangrakhnâi baêvarekhnâishca
baêvarekhnâi ahãxshtakhnâishca.

51. 'And that I may smite Tathravant of the bad law; that I may
smite Spinjaurushka, the worshipper of the Daevas; and that I
may bring unto the good law the nations of the Varedhakas and
of the Hvyaonas; and that I may smite of the Hvyaona nations their
fifties and their hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands,
their thousands and their tens of thousands, their tens of thousands
and their myriads of myriads.'

52. pairi-tacat pairi-jasat 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, viñdât
tem ýânem berezaidhish kava vîshtâspô.

ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

52. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the tall
Kavi Vishtaspa obtained that boon. 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard ....

 X. 

53. ashîm vanguhîm ýazamaide xshôithnîm
berezaitîm huraodhãm huyazatãm hvanat-caxrãm
amavaitîm dâtô-saokãm baêshazyãm
perethvîrãm sûrãm.

53. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high .... and
powerful.

54. âat aoxta ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti,
mâ-cish mê ånghãm zaothranãm viñdita
ýâ mâvôya nipârayeiñti mâ
narô pairishtâ-xshudhrô mâ jahika para-daxshta
mâ aperenâyu tauruna mâ kainina anupaêta
mashyânãm.

54. And the great Ashi Vanguhi said: 'None of 
those libations will be accepted by me, which are 
sent to me either by a man whose seed is dried out 35 , 
or by the courtezan who produces untimely issues 36 ,
or by young boys, or by girls who have known no man 37 . 

 35. See Vd3.20, note. 
 36. By procuring abortion. 
 37. She refuses the offerings of all barren beings.

55. ýat mãm tura pazdayañta 
âsu-aspa naotaraca 
âat azem tanûm aguze 
adhairi pâdhem gêush arshnô baremâyaonahe

âat mãm fraguzayañta 
ýôi aperenâyu tauruna 
ýôi kainina anupaêta mashyânãm.

55. 'When the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras 38 , clapping their
hands, ran after me 39 ,

I hid myself under the foot of a bull walking under his burden;
then young boys, and girls who had known no man, discovered me,
even while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, clapping
their hands, were running after me.

 38. Cf. Yt5.98 . The following clauses allude to some myth of 
 Ashi Vanghuhi connected with the conflict between the Turanians 
 and the Naotaras (either Tusa and Vistauru; cf. p. 71, note 7, or 
 more likely Vishtaspa himself, to whom the preceding chapter 
 [§§ 48-52] and the last but one clause of the Yasht refer). She tried 
 to flee in the way practised by Ulysses in the Cyclops' cavern; both 
 parties were pursuing the animal that bore her, though they knew 
 not what it bore, till children discovered her. 
 39. Dar. has this phrase in § 54. -JHP

56. ýatcit mãm tura pazdayañta 
âsu-aspa naotaraca 
atcit azem tanûm aguze 
adhairi maêshahe garô 
ýat varshnôish satô-karahe 
atcit mãm fraguzayañta 
ýôi aperenâyu tauruna 
ýôi kainina anupaêta mashyânãm

ýatcit mãm tura pazdayañta 
âsu-aspaêm naotaraca.

56. 'Even I hid myself under the throat of a ram of hundredfold
energy: then again young boys, and girls who had known no man,
discovered me, even while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras,
clapping their hands, were running after me.'

57. paoiryãm gerezãm gerezaêta 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
haca aputhrô-zanyâi jahikayâi, 
mâ hê avi pâdhem ava-hishta 
mâ gâtûm nipaidhyanguha, 
kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni 
asmanem avi frashusâni 
zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

57. The first wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi is her wailing
about the courtezan who destroys her fruit: 'Stand thou not near
her, sit thou not on her bed!' — 'What shall I do? Shall I go
back to the heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

58. bityãm gerezãm gerezaêta 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti 
haca avanghâi jahikayâi 
ýâ aom puthrem baraiti 
anyahmâi arshânâi varshtem 
paithe upa-baraiti, 
kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni 
asmanem avi frashusâni 
zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

58. The second wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi 
is her wailing about the courtezan who brings forth 
a child conceived of a stranger and presents it to 
her husband: 'What shall I do? Shall I go back 
to the heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

59. thrityãm gerezãm gerezaêta 
ashish vanguhi ýâ berezaiti, 
imat mê stâvishtem shyaothnem 
mashya vereziñti sâsta 
ýat kainyô uzvâdhayeiñti 
darekhem akhrvô nijâmayeiñti, 
kutha hîsh azem kerenavâni 
asmanem avi frashusâni 
zãm avi ni-urvisyâni.

59. This is the third wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi: 'This
is the worst deed that men and tyrants do, namely, when they deprive
maids, that have been barren for a long time, of marrying and
bringing forth children. What shall I do? Shall I go back to the
heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

60. âat mraot ahurô mazdå, 
ashi srîre dâmidhâite 
mâ avi asmanem frashusa 
mâ avi zãm ni-urvise 
itha mê tûm hãm-caranguha 
añtare aredhem nmânahe 
srîrahe xshathrô-keretahe,

60. Ahura Mazda answered: 'O fair and wise 
Ashi, go not back to the heavens, sink not into the 

earth! Stay here and walk inside the fine kingly 
palace.'

61. ana thwâ ýasna ýazâne 
ana ýasna frâyazâne 
ýase-thwâ ýazata vîshtâspô

pasne âpô dâityayå, 
berezem barât zaota vâcim 
hishtemnô pasca baresma, 
ana thwâ ýasna ýazâne 
ana ýasna frâyazâne 
ashi srîre dâmidhâite 
ahe raya ... tåscâ ýazamaide!

61. I shall worship thee with such a sacrifice, I 
shall worship and forward thee with such a sacrifice 
as Vishtaspa offered unto thee, behind the river Daitya 40 . 
The Zaotar lifted up a loud voice, with 
baresma before him. With that sort of sacrifice 
shall I worship thee? With that sort of sacrifice 
shall I worship and forward thee, O fair and wise 
Ashi? 
For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard....

 40. Cf. §§ 49 seq.

 (Recite silently:) 

62. (hôrmezd i hvadâe i awazûnî mardum
mardum sardagã hamâ sardagã ham bâ ýasht
i vahã vaem vahe dîn i mâzdayasnã âgâhî
âstvãnî nêkî rasãnât
êduñ bât,)

 (Recite aloud:) 

ýathâ ahû vairyô...(2). 
ýasnemca vahmemca aojasca zavareca âfrînâmi

ashôish vanghuyå cistôish vanghuyå erethê
vanghuyå rasãstâtô vanghuyå hvarenanghô
savanghô mazdadhâtahe. 
ashem vohû....

 ahmâi raêshca ... hazangrem ... jasa-mê ... (kerba mazhd) ... ashem vohû...!! 

* * 
*

62. Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength 
and vigour of Ashi Vanguhi; of the good Chisti 41 ; of the good Erethe; of the
good Rasastat; of the Glory and Weal, made by Mazda. 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.

 41. Cf. Sirozah, § 25. 

 Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 

 Contents 

 Prev 

 Yt17 

 Next 

 Avestan 

 Glossary
