AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (English): Mah Yasht ('Hymn to the Moon') 

 Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 

 Contents 

 Prev 

 Yt7sbe 

 Next 

 Avestan 

 Avesta: Khorda Avesta 

 7. MAH YASHT ("Hymn to the Moon") 

 This digital edition copyright © 1995 by Joseph H. Peterson.
All rights reserved. 

Translated by James Darmesteter, From Sacred Books of the
East , American Edition, 1898.

 0.
 May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!.... 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 
For sacrifice,prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness.... 
Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull; unto the
only-created Bull and unto the Bull of many species; 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....
 1.
 Hail to Ahura Mazda! Hail to the Amesha-Spentas! Hail to the
Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull! Hail to thee when
we look at thee! Hail to thee when thou lookest at us!
 2.
 How does the moon wax? How does the moon wane? 
For fifteen days does the moon wax; for fifteen days does the
moon wane. As long as her waxing, so long is the waning; as long
as her waning, so long is the waxing. 
'Who is there but thee who makes the moon wax and wane?'
 3.
 We sacrifice unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the
Bull, the holy and master of holiness. 
Here I look at the moon, here I perceive the moon; here I look
at the light of the moon, here I perceive the light of the moon.
The Amesha-Spentas stand up holding its glory; the Amesha-Spentas
stand up, pouring its glory upon the earth, made by Mazda.
 4.
 And when the light of the moon waxes warmer, golden-hued plants
grow on from the earth during the spring. 
We sacrifice unto the new moons, the full moons, and the Vishaptathas.

We sacrifice unto the new moon, the holy and master of holiness;

We sacrifice unto the full moon, the holy and master of holiness;

We sacrifice unto the Vishaptatha, the holy and master of holiness.
 5.
 I will sacrifice unto the Moon, that keeps in it the seed
of the Bull, the liberal, bright, glorious, water-giving, warmth-giving,
wisdom-giving, wealth-giving, riches-giving, thoughtfulness-giving,
weal-giving, freshness-giving, prosperity-giving, the liberal,
the healing.
 6.
 For its brightness and glory, I will offer unto it a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the Moon that keeps in it the
seed of the Bull. 
Unto the Moon that keeps in it the seed of the Bull, we offer
up the libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words. 
Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....
 7.
 Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of the Moon, that keeps in it the seed of the Bull, and of the
only-created Bull, and of the Bull of many species. 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good. 
Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body,
.... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy
Ones.

 Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 

 Contents 

 Prev 

 Yt7sbe 

 Next 

 Avestan
