AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (English): Khwarshed Yasht ('Hymn to the Sun') 

[ Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 
| Khorda Avesta: Contents 
| Prev 
| Khwarshed Yasht 
| Next 
| Avestan ] 

 Avesta: Khorda Avesta 

 6. KHWARSHED YASHT ("Hymn to the Sun") 

Translated by James Darmesteter, From Sacred Books of the
East , American Edition, 1898.

 0.
 May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!.... 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 
For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness.... 
Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun; 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....
 1.
 We sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun.

When the light of the sun waxes warmer, when the brightness of
the sun waxes warmer, then up stand the heavenly Yazatas, by hundreds
and thousands: they gather together its Glory, they make its Glory
pass down, they pour its Glory upon the earth made by Ahura, for
the increase of the world of holiness, for the increase of the
creatures of holiness, for the increase of the undying, shining,
swift-horsed Sun.
 2.
 And when the sun rises up, then the earth, made by Ahura,
becomes clean; the running waters become clean, the waters of
the wells become clean, the waters of the sea become clean, the
standing waters become clean; all the holy creatures, the creatures
of the Good Spirit, become clean.
 3.
 Should not the sun rise up, then the Daevas would destroy
all the things that are in the seven Karshvares, nor would the
heavenly Yazatas find any way of withstanding or repelling them
in the material world.
 4.
 He who offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed
Sun -- to withstand darkness, to withstand the Daevas born of darkness,
to withstand the robbers and bandits, to withstand the Yatus and
Pairikas, to withstand death that creeps in unseen -- offers it
up to Ahura Mazda, offers it up to the Amesha-Spentas, offers
it up to his own soul. He rejoices all the heavenly and worldly
Yazatas, who offers up a sacrifice unto the undying, shining,
swift-horsed Sun.
 5.
 I will sacrifice unto Mithra, the lord of wide pastures, who
has a thousand ears, ten thousand eyes. 
I will sacrifice unto the club of Mithra, the lord of wide pastures,
well struck down upon the skulls of the Daevas. 
I will sacrifice unto that friendship, the best of all friendships,
that reigns between the moon and the sun.
 6.
 For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed
Sun. Unto the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun we offer up the
libations, the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the
tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words. 
Yenghe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....
 7.
 Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

I bless the sacrifice and the invocation, and the strength and
vigour of the undying, shining, swift-horsed Sun. 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
Give unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body,
.... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy
Ones.

Go to [ Avesta -- Zoroastrian Archives 
| Khorda Avesta: Contents 
| Prev 
| Khwarshed Yasht 
| Next 
| Avestan ]
