AVESTA: KHORDA AVESTA (English): Rashn Yasht 

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 yt12sbe 
 Next 
 Translit. 
 Glossary 

 12. RASHN YASHT. 

Translated by James Darmesteter (From Sacred Books of the
East , American Edition, 1898.)

 0.
 May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced!.... 
Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathushtra,
one who hates the Daevas and obeys the laws of Ahura; 
For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto [Havani],
the holy and master of holiness. 
Unto Rashnu Razishta; unto Arshtat, who makes the world grow,
who makes the world increase; unto the true-spoken speech, that
makes the world grow; 
Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification.

Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

 I 

 1.
 The holy (Zarathushtra) asked him: 'O holy Ahura Mazda! I
ask thee; answer me with words of truth, thou who knowest the
truth. Thou art undeceivable, thou hast an undeceivable understanding;
thou art undeceivable, as thou knowest everything. 
'What of the Holy Word is created true? what is created progress-making?
what is fit to discern? what is healthful? what is wise? what
is happy and more powerful to destroy than all other creatures?'
 2.
 Ahura Mazda answered: 'I will declare that unto thee, O pure,
holy Spitama! 
'The most glorious Holy Word (itself), this is what in the Holy
Word is created true, what is created progress making, what is
fit to discern, what is healthful, wise, and happy, what is more
powerful to destroy than all other creatures.'
 3.
 Ahura Mazda said: 'Bind up a three-twigged baresma against
the way of the sun. [Address] unto me, Ahura Mazda, these words:
"We invoke, we bless [Ahura]; I invoke the friendship [of
Ahura] towards this var (ordeal) prepared, towards the fire and
the baresma, towards the full boiling [milk], towards the var
of oil and the sap of the plants."
 4.
 'Then I, Ahura Mazda, shall come for help unto thee, towards
this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma, towards the
full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of the
plants; 
'Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the cursing thought
of the wise, along with the kingly Glory, along with Saoka, made
by Mazda.
 5.
 'We invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong; I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma, towards
the full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the sap of:
the plants.
 6.
 'Then Rashnu the tall, the strong, will come for help unto
thee, towards this var prepared, towards the fire and the baresma,
towards the full boiling [milk], towards the var of oil and the
sap of the plants: 
'Along with the fiend-smiting Wind, along with the cursing thought
of the wise, along with the kingly Glory, along with Saoka, made
by Mazda.
 7.
 'O thou, holy Rashnu! O most true Rashnu! most beneficent
Rashnu! most knowing Rashnu! most discerning Rashnu I most fore-knowing
Rashnu! most far-seeing Rashnu I Rashnu, the best doer of justice!
Rashnu, the best smiter of thieves;
 8.
 'The uninjured, the best killer, smiter, destroyer of thieves
and bandits! in whatever part of the world thou art watching the
doings of men and making the account... (obscure).

 II 

 9.
 'Whether thou, O hoIy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Arezahi,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 III 

 10.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Savahi,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared ... in whatever part of the world thou art.

 IV 

 11.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Fradadhafshu,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 V 

 12.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vidadhafshu,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 VI 

 13.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vouru-bareshti,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 VII 

 14. ' Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the Karshvare Vouru-jareshti,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 VIII 

 15.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in this Karshvare, the bright
Hvaniratha, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of
the world thou art.

 IX 

 16.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the sea Vouru-Kasha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared .... in whatever part of the world thou
art.

 X 

 17.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the tree of the eagle,
that stands in the middle of the sea Vouru-Kasha, that is called
the tree of good remedies, the tree of powerful remedies, the
tree of all remedies, and on which rest the seeds of all plants;
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XI 

 18.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Aodhas of the Rangha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XII 

 19.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Sanaka of the Rangha,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XIII 

 20.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at one of the angles of
this earth, we invoke we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XIV 

 21.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art at the boundary of this
earth, we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards
this var prepared....

 XV 

 22.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in any place of this earth,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared....

 XVI 

 23.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art on the Hara Berezaiti, the
bright mountain around which the many (stars) revolve, where come
neither night nor darkness, no cold wind and no hot wind, no deathful
sickness, no uncleanness made by the Daevas, and the clouds cannot
reach up unto the Haraiti Bareza; we invoke, we bless Rashnu.
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XVII 

 24.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon the highest Hukairya,
of the deep precipices, made of gold, where from this river of
mine, Ardvi Sura Anahita, leaps from a thousand times the height
of a man, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared....

 XVIII 

 25.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art upon the Taera of the height
Haraiti, around which the stars, the moon, and the sun revolve,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XIX 

 26.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the star Vanant, made
by Mazda, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his
friendship towards this var prepared....

 XX 

 27.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the bright and glorious
star Tishtrya, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke
his friendship towards the var prepared....

 XXI 

 28.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the group of the Haptoiringa
stars, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XXII 

 29.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the waters in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXIII 

 30.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the earth in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXIV 

 31.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in those stars that have
the seed of the plants in them, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXV 

 32.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the stars that belong
to the Good Spirit, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I
invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXVI 

 33.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the moon which has the
seed of the Bull in it, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong.
I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXVII 

 34.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the swift-horsed sun,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XXVIII 

 35.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the sovereign endless
Light, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XXIX 

 36.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the bright, all-happy,
blissful abode of the holy Ones, we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the
strong. I invoke his friendship towards this var prepared....

 XXX 

 37.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art in the shining Garo-demana,
we invoke, we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship
towards this var prepared....

 XXXI 

 38.
 'Whether thou, O holy Rashnu! art, ... (obscure) we invoke,
we bless Rashnu, the strong. I invoke his friendship towards this
var prepared....
 39.
 'For his brightness and glory, I will offer unto him a sacrifice
worth being heard.... 
'Yenhe hatam: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda....
 40.
 'Yatha ahu vairyo: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness....

'I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour
of Rashnu Razishta; of Arshtat, who makes the world grow, who
makes the world increase; and of the true-spoken speech that makes
the world grow. 
'Ashem Vohu: Holiness is the best of all good.... 
'[Give] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of
body, .... give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the
holy Ones.'

 Home 
 Contents 
 Prev 
 yt12sbe 
 Next 
 Translit. 
 Glossary
