Katapayadi system - Wikipedia 

 Jump to content 

 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 

 Ancient Indian alphasyllabic numeral system 

 This article should specify the language of its non-English content using { { lang } } or { { langx } } , { { transliteration } } for transliterated languages, and { { IPA } } for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's multilingual support templates may also be used. See why . ( August 2022 ) 

 This article contains Indic text . Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks or boxes , misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text. 

 KaTaPaYadi System – Values 
 Part of a series on Numeral systems 
 Place-value notation 
 Hindu–Arabic numerals 
 Western Arabic 
 Eastern Arabic 

 Bengali 
 Devanagari 
 Gujarati 
 Gurmukhi 
 Odia 
 Sinhala 
 Tamil 
 Malayalam 
 Telugu 
 Kannada 
 Dzongkha 

 Tibetan 
 Balinese 
 Burmese 
 Javanese 
 Khmer 
 Lao 
 Mongolian 
 Sundanese 
 Thai 

 Other systems 
 History 

 Ancient 

 Babylonian 

 Post-classical 

 Cistercian 
 Mayan 
 Muisca 
 Pentadic 
 Quipu 
 Rumi 

 Contemporary 

 Cherokee 
 Kaktovik (Iñupiaq) 

 By radix/base 
 Common radices/bases 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 8 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 16 
 20 
 60 

 Non-standard radices/bases 

 Bijective   ( 1 ) 
 Signed-digit   ( balanced ternary ) 
 Mixed   ( factorial ) 
 Negative 
 Complex   ( 2 i ) 
 Non-integer   ( φ ) 
 Asymmetric 

 Sign-value notation 
 Non-alphabetic 
 Contemporary East Asian 

 Chinese 
 Hokkien 
 Suzhou 
 Japanese 
 Korean 
 Vietnamese 

 Historic East Asian 

 Counting rods 
 Tangut 

 Other non-alphabetic 

 Aegean 
 Attic 
 Aztec 
 Brahmi 
 Chuvash 
 Egyptian 
 Etruscan 
 Kharosthi 
 Prehistoric counting 
 Proto-cuneiform 
 Roman 
 Tally marks 

 Alphabetic 
 Abjad 
 Armenian 
 Alphasyllabic 
 Akṣarapallī 
 Āryabhaṭa 
 Kaṭapayādi 
 Coptic 
 Cyrillic 
 Geʽez 
 Georgian 
 Glagolitic 
 Greek 
 Hebrew 

 List of numeral systems v t e 

 Kaṭapayādi system ( Devanagari : कटपयादि, also known as Paralppēru , Malayalam: പരല്‍പ്പേര് ) of numerical notation is an ancient Indian alphasyllabic numeral system to depict letters to numerals for easy remembrance of numbers as words or verses . Assigning more than one letter to one numeral and nullifying certain other letters as valueless, this system provides the flexibility in forming meaningful words out of numbers which can be easily remembered. 

 History [ edit ] 
 The oldest available evidence of the use of Kaṭapayādi (Sanskrit: कटपयादि) system is from Grahacāraṇibandhana by Haridatta in 683 CE . [ 1 ] It has been used in Laghu·bhāskarīya·vivaraṇa written by Śaṅkara·nārāyaṇa in 869 CE . [ 2 ] 

 In some astronomical texts popular in Kerala planetary positions were encoded in the Kaṭapayādi system. The first such work is considered to be the Chandra-vakyani of Vararuci , who is traditionally assigned to the fourth century CE . Therefore, sometime in the early first millennium is a reasonable estimate for the origin of the Kaṭapayādi system. [ 3 ] 

 Aryabhata , in his treatise Ārya·bhaṭīya , is known to have used a similar, more complex system to represent astronomical numbers . There is no definitive evidence whether the Ka-ṭa-pa-yā-di system originated from Āryabhaṭa numeration . [ 4 ] 

 Geographical spread of the use [ edit ] 
 Almost all evidences of the use of Ka-ṭa-pa-yā-di system is from South India , especially Kerala . Not much is known about its use in North India. However, on a Sanskrit astrolabe discovered in North India , the degrees of the altitude are marked in the Kaṭapayādi system. It is preserved in the Sarasvati Bhavan Library of Sampurnanand Sanskrit University , Varanasi .
 [ 5 ] 

 The Ka-ṭa-pa-yā-di system is not confined to India. Some Pali chronograms based on the Ka-ṭa-pa-yā-di system have been discovered in Burma . [ 6 ] 

 Rules and practices [ edit ] 
 Following verse found in Śaṅkaravarman's Sadratnamāla explains the mechanism of the system. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] 

 \nमिश्रे तूपान्त्यहल् संख्या न च चिन्त्यो हलस्वर:॥"}},"i":0}}]}'> नञावचश्च शून्यानि सङ्ख्याः कटपयादय:। 
मिश्रे तूपान्त्यहल् संख्या न च चिन्त्यो हलस्वर:॥ 

 Transliteration: 

 ñayāvacas ca śūnyāni saṅkhyāḥ kaṭapayādayaḥ 
 miśre tūpāntyahal saṅkhyā na ca cintyo halasvaraḥ 

 Translation: na (न), ña (ञ) and a (अ)-s, i.e., vowels represent zero . The nine integers are represented by consonant group beginning with ka , ṭa , pa , ya . In a conjunct consonant, the last of the consonants alone will count. A consonant without a vowel is to be ignored. 

 Explanation: The assignment of letters to the numerals are as per the following arrangement (In Devanagari, Kannada, Telugu & Malayalam scripts respectively) 

 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 0 

 ka क ಕ క ക 
 kha ख ಖ ఖ ഖ 
 ga ग ಗ గ ഗ 
 gha घ ಘ ఘ ഘ 
 nga ङ ಙ
 ఙ ങ 
 ca च ಚ చ ച 
 cha छ ಛ ఛ ഛ 
 ja ज ಜ జ ജ 
 jha झ ಝ ఝ ഝ 
 nya ञ ಞ ఞ ഞ 

 ṭa ट ಟ ట ട 
 ṭha ठ ಠ ఠ ഠ 
 ḍa ड ಡ డ ഡ 
 ḍha ढ ಢ ఢ ഢ 
 ṇa ण ಣ ణ ണ 
 ta त ತ త ത 
 tha थ ಥ థ ഥ 
 da द ದ ద ദ 
 dha ध ಧ ధ ധ 
 na न ನ న ന 

 pa प ಪ ప പ 
 pha फ ಫ ఫ ഫ 
 ba ब బ ബ 
 bha भ ಭ భ ഭ 
 ma म ಮ మ മ 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 
 – 

 ya य ಯ య യ 
 ra र ರ ర ര 
 la ल ల ల ല 
 va व ವ వ വ 
 śa श ಶ శ ശ 
 ṣa ष ಷ ష ഷ 
 sa स ಸ స സ 
 ha ह ಹ హ ഹ 
 – 
 – 

 Consonants have numerals assigned as per the above table. For example, ba (ब) is always 3 whereas 5 can be represented by either nga (ङ) or ṇa (ण) or ma (म) or śha (श). 
 All stand-alone vowels like a (अ) and ṛ (ऋ) are assigned to zero. 
 In case of a conjunct, consonants attached to a non-vowel will be valueless. For example, kya (क्य) is formed by, k (क्) + y (य्) + a (अ). The only consonant standing with a vowel is ya (य). So the corresponding numeral for kya (क्य) will be 1. 
 There is no way of representing the decimal separator in the system. 
 Indians used the Hindu–Arabic numeral system for numbering, traditionally written in increasing place values from left to right. This is as per the rule " अङ्कानां वामतो गतिः " which means numbers go from right to left. 

 Variations [ edit ] 
 The consonant , ḷ (Malayālam: ള, Devanāgarī: ळ, Kannada: ಳ) is employed in works using the Kaṭapayādi system, like Mādhava's sine table . 
 Late medieval practitioners do not map the stand-alone vowels to zero. But, it is sometimes considered valueless. 

 Usage [ edit ] 

 Mathematics and astronomy [ edit ] 
 Mādhava's sine table constructed by 14th century Kerala mathematician - astronomer Mādhava of Saṅgama·grāma employs the Kaṭapayādi system to list the trigonometric sines of angles. 
 Karaṇa·paddhati , written in the 15th century, has the following śloka for the value of pi (π) 

 അനൂനനൂന്നാനനനുന്നനിത്യൈ- 
 സ്സമാഹതാശ്ചക്രകലാവിഭക്താഃ 
 ചണ്ഡാംശുചന്ദ്രാധമകുംഭിപാലൈര്‍- 
 വ്യാസസ്തദര്‍ദ്ധം ത്രിഭമൗര്‍വിക സ്യാത്‌ 

 Transliteration 

 anūnanūnnānananunnanityai 
 ssmāhatāścakra kalāvibhaktoḥ 
 caṇḍāṃśucandrādhamakuṃbhipālair 
 vyāsastadarddhaṃ tribhamaurvika syāt 

 It gives the circumference of a circle of diameter, anūnanūnnānananunnanityai (10,000,000,000) as caṇḍāṃśucandrādhamakuṃbhipālair (31415926536). 

 Śaṅkara·varman's Sad·ratna·mālā uses the Kaṭapayādi system. The first verse of Chapter 4 of the Sad·ratna·mālā ends with the line: [ 9 ] 

 (स्याद्) भद्राम्बुधिसिद्धजन्मगणितश्रद्धा स्म यद् भूपगी: 

 Transliteration 

 (syād) bhadrāmbudhisiddhajanmagaṇitaśraddhā sma yad bhūpagīḥ 

 Splitting the consonants in the relevant phrase gives, 

 भ bha 
 द् d 
 रा rā 
 म् m 
 बु bu 
 द् d 
 धि dhi 
 सि si 
 द् d 
 ध dha 
 ज ja 
 न् n 
 म ma 
 ग ga 
 णि ṇi 
 त ta 
 श् ś 
 र ra 
 द् d 
 धा dhā 
 स् s 
 म ma 
 य ya 
 द् d 
 भू bhū 
 प pa 
 गी gī 

 4 
 – 
 2 
 – 
 3 
 – 
 9 
 7 
 – 
 9 
 8 
 – 
 5 
 3 
 5 
 6 
 – 
 2 
 – 
 9 
 – 
 5 
 1 
 – 
 4 
 1 
 3 

 Reversing the digits to modern-day usage of descending order of decimal places, we get 314159265358979324 which is the value of pi (π) to 17 decimal places, except the last digit might be rounded off to 4. 

 This verse encrypts the value of pi (π) up to 31 decimal places. 

 गोपीभाग्यमधुव्रात-शृङ्गिशोदधिसन्धिग॥
 खलजीवितखाताव गलहालारसंधर॥ 

 ಗೋಪೀಭಾಗ್ಯಮಧುವ್ರಾತ-ಶೃಂಗಿಶೋದಧಿಸಂಧಿಗ ||
 ಖಲಜೀವಿತಖಾತಾವ ಗಲಹಾಲಾರಸಂಧರ || 
 This verse directly yields the decimal equivalent of pi divided by 10: pi/10 = 0.31415926535897932384626433832792 

 గోపీభాగ్యమధువ్రాత-శృంగిశోదధిసంధిగ |
 ఖలజీవితఖాతావ గలహాలారసంధర || 
 Traditionally, the order of digits are reversed to form the number, in katapayadi system. This rule is violated in this sloka. 

 Carnatic music [ edit ] 
 Melakarta chart as per Kaṭapayādi system 
 The melakarta ragas of the Carnatic music are named so that the first two syllables of the name will give its number. This system is sometimes called the Ka-ta-pa-ya-di sankhya . The Swaras 'Sa' and 'Pa' are fixed, and here is how to get the other swaras from the melakarta number. 

 Melakartas 1 through 36 have Ma1 and those from 37 through 72 have Ma2. 
 The other notes are derived by noting the (integral part of the) quotient and remainder when one less than the melakarta number is divided by 6. If the melakarta number is greater than 36, subtract 36 from the melakarta number before performing this step. 
 'Ri' and 'Ga' positions: the raga will have:
 Ri1 and Ga1 if the quotient is 0 
 Ri1 and Ga2 if the quotient is 1 
 Ri1 and Ga3 if the quotient is 2 
 Ri2 and Ga2 if the quotient is 3 
 Ri2 and Ga3 if the quotient is 4 
 Ri3 and Ga3 if the quotient is 5 
 'Da' and 'Ni' positions: the raga will have:
 Da1 and Ni1 if remainder is 0 
 Da1 and Ni2 if remainder is 1 
 Da1 and Ni3 if remainder is 2 
 Da2 and Ni2 if remainder is 3 
 Da2 and Ni3 if remainder is 4 
 Da3 and Ni3 if remainder is 5 

 See swaras in Carnatic music for details on above notation. 

 Raga Dheerasankarabharanam [ edit ] 

 The katapayadi scheme associates dha 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 9 and ra 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 2, hence the raga's melakarta number is 29 (92 reversed). 29 less than 36, hence Dheerasankarabharanam has Ma1. Divide 28 (1 less than 29) by 6, the quotient is 4 and the remainder 4. Therefore, this raga has Ri2, Ga3 (quotient is 4) and Da2, Ni3 (remainder is 4). Therefore, this raga's scale is Sa Ri2 Ga3 Ma1 Pa Da2 Ni3 SA . 

 Raga MechaKalyani [ edit ] 

 From the coding scheme Ma 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 5, Cha 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 6. Hence the raga's melakarta number is 65 (56 reversed). 65 is greater than 36. So MechaKalyani has Ma2. Since the raga's number is greater than 36 subtract 36 from it. 65–36=29. 28 (1 less than 29) divided by 6: quotient=4, remainder=4. Ri2 Ga3 occurs. Da2 Ni3 occurs. So MechaKalyani has the notes Sa Ri2 Ga3 Ma2 Pa Da2 Ni3 SA . 

 Exception for Simhendramadhyamam [ edit ] 
 As per the above calculation, we should get Sa 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 7, Ha 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 8 giving the number 87 instead of 57 for Simhendramadhyamam. This should be ideally Sa 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 7, Ma 

 ↔ 

 {\displaystyle \leftrightarrow } 

 5 giving the number 57. So it is believed that the name should be written as Sihmendramadhyamam (as in the case of Bra hm ana in Sanskrit). 

 Representation of dates [ edit ] 
 Important dates were remembered by converting them using Kaṭapayādi system. These dates are generally represented as number of days since the start of Kali Yuga . It is sometimes called kalidina sankhya . 

 The Malayalam calendar known as kollavarsham (Malayalam: കൊല്ലവര്‍ഷം) was adopted in Kerala beginning from 825 CE , revamping some calendars. This date is remembered as āchārya vāgbhadā , converted using Kaṭapayādi into 1434160 days since the start of Kali Yuga . [ 10 ] 
 Narayaniyam , written by Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri , ends with the line, āyurārogyasaukhyam (ആയുരാരോഗ്യസൌഖ്യം) which means long-life, health and happiness. [ 11 ] 

 In Malayalam 
 ആയുരാരോഗ്യസൌഖ്യം 

 In Devanagari 
 आयुरारोग्यसौख्यम् 

 In IAST 
 āyurārogyasaukhyam 

 Value as per Kaṭapayādi 
 1712210 

 This number is the time at which the work was completed represented as number of days since the start of Kali Yuga as per the Malayalam calendar . 

 Others [ edit ] 
 Some people use the Kaṭapayādi system in naming newborns. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] 
 The following verse compiled in Malayalam by Koduṅṅallur Kuññikkuṭṭan Taṃpurān using Kaṭapayādi is the number of days in the months of Gregorian Calendar . 

 പലഹാരേ പാലു നല്ലൂ, പുലര്‍ന്നാലോ കലക്കിലാം 
 ഇല്ലാ പാലെന്നു ഗോപാലന്‍ – ആംഗ്ലമാസദിനം ക്രമാല്‍ 

 Transliteration 

 palahāre pālu nallū, pularnnālo kalakkilāṃ 
 illā pālennu gopālan – āṃgḷamāsadinaṃ kramāl 

 Translation: Milk is best for breakfast, when it is morning, it should be stirred. But Gopālan says there is no milk – the number of days of English months in order. 
 Converting pairs of letters using Kaṭapayādi yields – pala (പല) is 31, hāre (ഹാരേ) is 28, pālu പാലു = 31, nallū (നല്ലൂ) is 30, pular (പുലര്‍) is 31, nnālo (ന്നാലോ) is 30, kala (കല) is 31, kkilāṃ (ക്കിലാം) is 31, illā (ഇല്ലാ) is 30, pāle (പാലെ) is 31, nnu go (ന്നു ഗോ) is 30, pālan (പാലന്‍) is 31. 

 See also [ edit ] 

 Abjad numerals 
 Aksharapalli 
 Aryabhata numeration 
 Bhutasamkhya system 
 Gematria 
 Greek numerals 
 Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics 
 Madhava's sine table 
 Mnemonic major system 
 Notarikon 
 Temurah (Kabbalah) 
 Alphasyllabic numeral system 

 References [ edit ] 

 ↑ Sreeramamula Rajeswara Sarma, THE KATAPAYADI SYSTEM OF NUMERICAL NOTATION AND ITS SPREAD OUTSIDE KERALA, Rev. d'Histoire de Mathmatique 18 (2012)

 ↑ J J O'Connor; E F Robertson (November 2000). "Sankara Narayana" . School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 1 January 2010 . 
 ↑ Plofker, Kim (2009). Mathematics in India . Princeton University Press . p.   384. ISBN   978-0-691-12067-6 . 
 ↑ J. F. Fleet (April 1912). "The Ka-ta-pa-ya-di Notation of the Second Arya-Siddhanta" . The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland . 44 (2). Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland : 459– 462. doi : 10.1017/S0035869X00043197 . JSTOR   25190035 . S2CID   163907655 . 
 ↑ Sreeramamula Rajeswara Sarma (1999), Kaṭapayādi Notation on a Sanskrit Astrolabe. Ind. J. Hist. Sc.34(4) (1999) 
 ↑ J.F. Fleet (July 1911). "The Katapayadi System of Expressing Numbers" . The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland . 43 (3). Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland : 788– 794. doi : 10.1017/S0035869X00041952 . JSTOR   25189917 . S2CID   163597699 . 
 ↑ Sarma, K.V. (2001). "Sadratnamala of Sankara Varman". Indian Journal of History of Science (Indian National Academy of Science, New Delhi) 36 (3–4 (Supplement)): 1–58. "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) 
 ↑ Anand Raman. "The Ancient Katapayadi Formula and the Modern Hashing Method" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 June 2011. {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires | journal= ( help ) 
 ↑ Sarma (2001), p. 26 
 ↑ Francis Zimmerman, 1989, Lilavati, gracious lady of arithmetic – India – A Mathematical Mystery Tour "Lilavati, gracious lady of arithmetic - India - A Mathematical Mystery Tour | UNESCO Courier | Find Articles at BNET" . Archived from the original on 6 September 2009 . Retrieved 3 January 2010 . 
 ↑ Dr. C Krishnan Namboodiri, Chekrakal Illam, Calicut, Namboothiti.com Dr. C Krishnan Namboodiri. " "Katapayaadi" or "Paralpperu" " . Namboothiri Websites Trust . Retrieved 1 January 2010 . 
 ↑ Visti Larsen, Choosing the auspicious name [ permanent dead link ] 
 ↑ "The Principles of Naming" . 

 External links [ edit ] 
 Kaṭapayādi Saṅkhyā, a Kaṭapayādi encoding-decoding system. 

 Saṅkhyāpaddhatiḥ (सङ्ख्यापद्धतिः), a collection of ancient Indian alpha-syllabic numeral systems 

 Further reading [ edit ] 
 A.A. Hattangadi, Explorations in Mathematics, Universities Press (India) Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad (2001) ISBN   81-7371-387-1 

 v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians 
 (Complete list) 
 Acyuta Piṣāraṭi 
 Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ 
 Citrabhānu 
 Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi 
 Devācārya 
 Govinda Bhattathiri 
 Govindasvāmin 
 Haridatta 
 Jyeṣṭhadeva 
 Kochukrishnan Asan 
 Madhava of Sangamagrama 
 Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri 
 Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji 
 Nīlakaṇṭha II 
 Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri 
 Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa 
 Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam 
 Putumana Somayāji 
 Śankara Vāriyar 
 Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ 
 Udayadivākara 
 Vararuci I 
 Vidyamadhava 
 Treatises 
 Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) 
 Candrachayaganita 
 Dasādhyāyi 
 Drigganita 
 Dṛkkaraṇa 
 Gaṇitayuktayah 
 Golavada 
 Golasara 
 Grahacāraṇinibandhana 
 Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha 
 Jyotirmimamsa 
 Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha 
 Kanakkusāraṃ 
 Karaṇapaddhati 
 Kriyakramakari 
 Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) 
 Madhyamanayanaprakara 
 Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya 
 Pañcabodha 
 Sadratnamālā 
 Sidhhantadarpana 
 Spuṭanirṇaya 
 Tantrasamgraha 
 Venvaroha 
 Yuktibhāṣā 
 Concepts/Topics 
 Chandravakyas 
 Drigganita system 
 Kaṭapayādi system 
 Madhava's correction terms 
 Madhava series 
 Madhava's sine table 
 Parahita system 
 Places associated with members of the school 
 Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) 
 Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) 
 Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) 
 Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) 
 Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) 
 Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) 
 Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) 
 Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) 
 Tirunavaya (Haridatta) 

 v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient 
 Apastamba 
 Baudhayana 
 Katyayana 
 Manava 
 Pāṇini 
 Pingala 
 Yajnavalkya 
 Classical 
 Āryabhaṭa I 
 Āryabhaṭa II 
 Bhāskara I 
 Bhāskara II 
 Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri 
 Brahmadeva 
 Brahmagupta 
 Govindasvāmi 
 Halayudha 
 Jyeṣṭhadeva 
 Kamalakara 
 Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma 
 Mahāvīra 
 Mahendra Sūri 
 Munishvara 
 Narayana 
 Parameshvara 
 Achyuta Pisharati 
 Jagannatha Samrat 
 Nilakantha Somayaji 
 Śrīpati 
 Sridhara 
 Gangesha Upadhyaya 
 Varāhamihira 
 Sankara Variar 
 Virasena 
 Modern 
 Srinivasa Ramanujan 
 Satyendra Nath Bose 
 P.C. Mahalanobis 
 Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar 
 C.R. Rao 
 Veeravalli S. Varadarajan 
 S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan 
 K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) 
 M. S. Narasimhan 
 C. S. Seshadri 
 Harish-Chandra 
 Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai 
 Tilak Raj Prabhakar 
 Manjul Bhargava 
 Akshay Venkatesh 
 Ravi Vakil 
 Kannan Soundararajan 
 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science 
 Treatises 
 Aryabhatiya 
 Bakhshali manuscript 
 Bijaganita 
 Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta 
 Ganita Kaumudi 
 Grahalaghava 
 Kanakkusaram 
 Karanapaddhati 
 Līlāvatī 
 Lokavibhaga 
 Pātīgaṇita 
 Paulisa Siddhanta 
 Paitamaha Siddhanta 
 Romaka Siddhanta 
 Sadratnamala 
 Siddhānta Shiromani 
 Śulba Sūtras 
 Surya Siddhanta 
 Tantrasamgraha 
 Vasishtha Siddhanta 
 Veṇvāroha 
 Yuktibhāṣā 
 Yavanajataka 
 Pioneering innovations 
 Brahmi numerals 
 Hindu–Arabic numeral system 
 Symbol for zero (0) 
 Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions 
 Centres 
 Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics 
 Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) 
 Historians of mathematics 
 Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) 
 Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) 
 Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) 
 M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) 
 P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) 
 B. B. Datta (1888–1958) 
 T. Hayashi 
 A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) 
 A. N. Singh (1901–1954) 
 C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) 
 T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) 
 S. N. Sen (1918–1992) 
 K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) 
 K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) 
 Translators 
 Walter Eugene Clark 
 Henry Thomas Colebrooke 
 David Pingree 
 Other regions 
 Babylon 
 China 
 Greece 
 Islamic mathematics 
 Europe 
 Modern institutions 
 Indian Statistical Institute 
 Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana 
 Chennai Mathematical Institute 
 Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
 Indian Institute of Science 
 Harish-Chandra Research Institute 
 Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education 
 Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics 
 TIFR 

 v t e Scientific research in Kerala Pre-19th century 
 Achyuta Pisharati 
 Candravakyas 
 Citrabhanu 
 Damodara 
 Ganita-yukti-bhasa 
 Govinda Bhattathiri 
 Haridatta 
 Jyā, koti-jyā and utkrama-jyā 
 Jyeṣṭhadeva 
 Jyotirmimamsa 
 Karanapaddhati 
 Katapayadi system 
 Kriyakramakari 
 Madhava of Sangamagrama 
 Madhava series 
 Madhava's sine table 
 Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri 
 Nilakantha Somayaji 
 Parameshvara 
 Sadratnamala 
 Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa 
 Tantrasamgraha 
 Organizations 
 C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram 
 Centre for Development Studies 
 Centre for Earth Science Studies 
 Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Kerala) 
 Centre for Rural Management 
 Centre of Science and Technology for Rural Development 
 Cyberpark 
 Kerala Mathematical Association 
 Kerala Science and Technology Museum 
 Kerala Science Congress 
 Kerala Soil Museum 
 Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment 
 Krishi Vigyan Kendra Kannur 
 Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre 
 Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology 
 Regional Agricultural Research Station, Pattambi 
 Rice Research Station, Moncombu 
 Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre 
 Institutions 
 Agricultural Research Station, Anakkayam 
 Agricultural Research Station, Mannuthy 
 Agronomic Research Station, Chalakudy 
 Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre 
 Aromatic and Medicinal Plants Research Station, Odakkali 
 Banana Research Station, Kannara 
 Cashew Research Station, Madakkathara 
 Central Institute of Fisheries Technology 
 Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute 
 Central Tuber Crops Research Institute 
 Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology 
 College of Horticulture 
 Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre 
 Institute of Handloom and Textile Technology 
 Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram 
 Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology 
 Indian Institute of Spices Research 
 Jubilee Mission Medical College and Research Institute 
 Kerala Forest Research Institute 
 Kerala School of Mathematics, Kozhikode 
 Mar Athanasios College for Advanced Studies, Tiruvalla 
 National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology 
 National Institute of Speech and Hearing 
 National Research Institute for Panchakarma 
 Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory 
 Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library 
 Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology 
 Srinivasa Ramanujan Institute of Basic Sciences 
 St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute 
 Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute 
 Vadakke Madham Brahmaswam Vedic Research Centre 
 Scientists 
 Ajit Varki 
 C. V. Subramanian 
 Dileep George 
 E. C. George Sudarshan 
 G. Madhavan Nair 
 George Varghese 
 K. R. Ramanathan 
 K. Radhakrishnan 
 M. G. K. Menon 
 Matthew Pothen Thekaekara 
 P. N. Vinayachandran 
 Pisharoth Rama Pisharoty 
 Pulickel Ajayan 
 R. S. Krishnan 
 Sainudeen Pattazhy 
 T. A. Venkitasubramanian 
 Thanu Padmanabhan 
 Thomas Zacharia 
 Vainu Bappu 
 Varghese Mathai 
 Vinod Scaria 
 Other articles 
 A Passage to Infinity 
 FORV Sagar Sampada 
 Swatantra 2014 
 Techno-lodge 
 Technology Business Incubator TBI-NITC 
 A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy 

 Templates 
 Category 
 WikiProject 
 India portal 

 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Katapayadi_system&oldid=1368270411 " 
 Categories : Alphabetic numeral systems Mnemonics Indian mathematics Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2019 Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from August 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles containing Sanskrit-language text CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links 

 Search 

 Search 

 Katapayadi system 

 7 languages 

 Add topic
