JOSEPHUS — ANTIQUITIES OF THE JEWS, Book 1, Chapter 2 (the Seth / two-pillars passage)
Source: Flavius Josephus, Complete Works, Whiston translation (1905 ed.), archive.org
         identifier: completeworksoff05jose — plain-text (DjVuTXT) download.
         Full text: library/josephus/josephus-complete-works-1905.djvu.txt
Context: the passage the project's Seth prophet-ficha references — Seth's descendants
         invent astronomy and inscribe it on two pillars (one brick, one stone) to outlast
         Adam's predicted destructions by fire and by water.

his murder, was solicitous for posterity, and had a vehement desire for children, he being 230 years old; after which time he lived auother 700, and then died. He had indeed many other children,* but Seth in particular. As for the rest, it would be tedious to name them; I will therefore only eudeavour to give an account of those that proceeded from Seth. Now this Seth, when he was brought up, and came to those years in which he could discern what was good, became a virtuous man; and as he was himself of an excellent character, so did he leave children behind him who imitated his virtues. All these proved to be of good dispositions. They also inhabited the same country without dissensions, and in a happy condition, without any misfortunes falling upon them till they died. They also were the inventors of that peculiar sort of wisdom which is concerned with the heavenly bodies, and their order. And that their inventions might not be lost before they were sufficiently known, upon Adam's prediction that the world was to be destroyed at one time by the force of fire, and at another time by the violence and quanity of water, they made two pillars; the one of brick, the other of stone: they inscribed their discoveries on them both, * The number of Adam's children, as says the old tradition, was thirty-three sons and twenty ""tree daughters*. that in case the pillar of brick should be destroyed by the flood, the pillar of stone might remain, and exhibit those discoveries to mankind; and also inform them that there was another pillar of brick erected by them. Now this remains in the land of Siriad to this day.
